
ITALIAN ORTHOGRAPHY
Italian orthography uses a variant of the Latin alphabet consisting of 21 letters to write the Italian language.
ALPHABET
Section::::Alphabet.
The base alphabet consists of 21 letters: five vowels (A, E, I, O U) and 16 consonants. The letters J, K, W, X and Y are not part of the proper alphabet, and appear only in loanwords (e.g., 'jeans'), foreign names, and in a handful of native words—such as the names Jesolo, Bettino Craxi, and Walter, which all derive from regional languages. In addition, grave, acute and circumflex accents may modify vowel letters.
!Letter
! Name
! Diacritics
Double consonants are geminated: fatto , palla , bevve etc.
VOWELS
Section::::Vowels.
The Italian alphabet has five vowel letters, . Of those, only represents one sound value while each of the others has two. In addition, and indicate a different pronunciation of a preceding or (see below).
In stressed syllables, represents both open and close . Similarly, represents both open and close (see the Italian phonology for further details on these sounds). There is typically no orthographic distinction between the open and closed sounds represented, though accent marks are used in certain instances (see below). In unstressed syllables, only the close variants occur.
In addition to representing the respective vowels and , and also typically represent the semivowels and , respectively, when unstressed and occurring before another vowel. Many exceptions exist (e.g. , , , , , , , , , , , ). Unstressed may represent that a preceding or following or is 'soft' ().
C AND G
Section::::C and G.
Normally, and represent the plosives and , respectively, unless they precede a front vowel ( or ) when they represent the affricates (like English ch) and (like English j).
The letter can also function merely as an indicator that the preceding or is soft, e.g. cia (), giu (). When the hard pronunciation occurs before a front vowel, digraphs and are used, so that represents or and represents or . In the evolution of the Latin language, the postalveolar affricates and were contextual variants of the velar consonants and . They eventually came to be full phonemes, and the said orthographic practice was introduced to distinguish them. The phonemicity of the affricates can be demonstrated with the minimal pairs:
!colspan="2" Plosive
!colspan="2" Affricate
!rowspan="2"Before , 
ch 'India ink'
c 'China'
gh 'dormouse'
g 'lap', 'tour'
!rowspan="2"Elsewhere
c 'candy'
ci 'shawm'
g 'rooster'
gi 'yellow'
The trigraphs and are used to indicate geminated and , respectively, when they occur before or ; e.g. ('eyes'), ('to dress up').
The digraph is used before and to represent ; before other vowels, is used. Otherwise, represents , the of which follows the normal orthographic rules explained above.
!colspan="2" 
!colspan="2" 
!Before 
sch 
sc 
!Elsewhere
sc 
sci 
Other than in a few Northern Italian dialects, intervocalic , , and are always geminated and no orthographic distinction is made to indicate this.
S AND Z
Section::::S and Z.
 and are ambiguous to voicing.
* The voiceless occurs:
* At the start of a word before a vowel (e.g. Sara ) or a voiceless consonant (e.g. )
* After any consonant (e.g. )
* Before a voiceless consonant (e.g. )
* At the start of the second part of a compound word (e.g. , , , , , , , , ). These words are formed by adding a prefix to a word beginning with
* The voiced occurs before voiced consonants (e.g. ).
* It can be either voiceless or voiced ( or ) between vowels; in standard Tuscany-based pronunciation some words are pronounced with between vowels (e.g. , , , , , , , , ); in Northern Italy (and also increasingly in Tuscany) between vowels is always pronounced with (with some exceptions) whereas in Southern Italy between vowels is always pronounced .
* It is normally voiceless :
* At the start of a word in which the second syllable starts with a voiceless consonant ( , , )
* Exceptions (because they are of Greek origin): , , , , ,
* When followed by an which is followed, in turn, by another vowel (e.g. , , )
* Exceptions: , all words derived from words obeying other rules (e.g. , which is derived from )
* After the letter (e.g. )
* Exceptions: and
* In the suffixes -anza, -enza and -onzolo (e.g. , , )
* It is voiced :
* At the start of a word in which the second syllable starts with a voiced consonant or (or ) itself (e.g. , )
* Exceptions: ,
* At the start of a word when followed by two vowels (e.g. )
* Exceptions: and its derived terms (see above)
* If it is single (not doubled) and between two single vowels (e.g. )
* Exceptions: (from the German pronunciation of )
Between vowels and/or semivowels ( and ), is pronounced as if doubled ( or , e.g. , ).
OTHER LETTERS
Section::::Other letters.
In addition to being used to indicate a hard or before front vowels, is also used to distinguish , , , (present indicative of , 'to have') from ('or'), ('to the', m. pl.), ('to'), ('year'); since is always silent, there is no difference in the pronunciation of such words. In loanwords such as , the h is still silent.
The letters J (I lunga 'long I'), K (cappa), W (V doppia or doppia V 'double V'), X (ics) and Y (ipsilon or I greca 'Greek I') are used for loanwords only, with few exceptions. 
DIACRITICS
Section::::Diacritics.
The acute accent may be used on and to represent close-mid vowels when they are stressed in a position other than the default second-to-last syllable. This use of accents is generally mandatory only in the final syllable; elsewhere, accents are generally found only in dictionaries. Since final is hardly ever close-mid, is very rarely encountered in written Italian (e.g. 'subway', from the original French pronunciation of with a final-stressed ). The grave accent may be used on and when they represent open-mid vowels. The accents may also be used to differentiate minimal pairs within Italian (for example 'peach' vs. 'fishing'), but in practice this is limited to didactic texts. In the case of final and , both possibilities are encountered. The by far most common option is the grave accent, though this may be due to the rarity of the acute accent to represent stress; the alternative of employing the acute is in practice limited to erudite texts, but can be justified as both vowels are high (as in Catalan). However, since there are no corresponding low (or lax) vowels to contrast with in Italian, both choices are equally acceptable.
The circumflex accent can be used to mark the contraction of two vowels, especially two i's. For example, it can be used to differentiate words like ('genes', plural of ) and ('geniuses', plural of ). This is especially seen in older texts, since two homophones are usually distinguished by the context.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Danesi, Marcel (1996). Italian the Easy way.
