
LIST OF DRAGON BALL FILMS
Since the debut of the anime adaptation of Akira Toriyama's Dragon Ball manga in 1986, Toei Animation has produced twenty theatrical films based on the franchise: four based on the original Dragon Ball anime, fifteen based on the sequel series Dragon Ball Z and one upcoming film based on the Dragon Ball Super series.
The first seventeen films were originally shown as back-to-back presentations alongside other Toei film productions and thus have a running time below feature length (around 45–60 minutes each), the sole exception being 1996's (which has a running time of 80 minutes). The first through fifth films were shown at the , while the sixth through seventeenth films were shown at the . These films were mostly alternate re-tellings of certain story arcs involving new characters or extra side-stories that do not correlate with the same continuity as the manga or TV series. By 2002, the first seventeen films drew a box office audience of 49million viewers, grossed () in box office revenue, and sold over 500,000 home video units in Japan, making it the highest-grossing anime film franchise ever at the time.
The newest films in the series, , and , differ from the earlier ones, as they are full-length feature films set between chapters 517 and 518 of the manga, with Toriyama deeply involved in their creation. Toriyama did have some involvement with the earlier films, such as checking the scripts, altering new characters and their names or designing them from the ground up himself.
There are also three television specials that were broadcast on Fuji TV and two short films, which were shown at the 2008 Jump Super Anime Tour and Jump Festa 2012 respectively. A two-part hour-long crossover TV special between Dragon Ball Z, One Piece and Toriko aired on Fuji TV in 2013. Additionally, there is a two-part original video animation created as strategy guides for the 1993 video game , which was remade in 2010 and included with the video game.
As with the franchise's anime television series, all twenty films and the first three TV specials were licensed in North America by Funimation. Dragon Ball Z movies six and twelve received select theatrical presentations in the United States, as part of a double-feature on March 17, 2006, while movies fourteen and fifteen were given limited theatrical runs in August 2014 and August 2015 respectively. In Europe, AB Groupe licensed the second and third Dragon Ball movies, the first nine Z movies and the first two TV specials.
THEATRICAL FILMS
Section::::Theatrical films.
! No.!! Japanese title!! English translation!! English title !! Japanese release !! North American release
20   Broly    
TELEVISION SPECIALS
Section::::Television specials.
The Dragon Ball franchise has spawned three one-hour long television specials that aired on Fuji TV, the first two based on the "Z" portion of the series and the third based on the "GT" portion. Of these specials, the first and third are original stories created by the anime staff, while the second is based on a special chapter of the manga.
Though the specials aired on TV in Japan, Funimation's North American releases of the episodes are on home video, each one labeled "Feature" the same as their theatrical films. This, doubled with the inclusion of the "Z" specials in Funimation's remastered "Movie Double Features" has caused fans to continue to erroneously believe these to be theatrical films, when they are not.
On April 7, 2013, a two-part hour-long crossover TV special, between Dragon Ball Z, One Piece and Toriko, referred to as Dream 9 Toriko & One Piece & Dragon Ball Z Super Collaboration Special!! aired on Fuji TV. The first part is named and the second is titled . The plot has the International Gourmet Organization (from Toriko) sponsoring the Tenka'ichi Shokuōkai, a race with no rules that characters from all three series compete in.
On October 8, 2017, a two-part TV special of Dragon Ball Super aired on Fuji TV. It counted as both episodes 109 and 110 of the series.
! Japanese titleEnglish translation !! English title !! Japanese air date !! North American release
A Lonesome, Final Battle - The Father of Z Warrior Son Goku, who Challenged Freeza  
Defiance in the Face of Despair!! The Remaining Super-Warriors: Gohan and Trunks   
Goku Sidestory! The Proof of his Courage is the Four-Star Ball   
FESTIVAL SHORTS
Section::::Festival shorts.
Dragon Ball: Yo! Son Goku and His Friends Return!! is a 35-minute short film that was shown at the 2008 Jump Super Anime Tour, which visited ten Japanese cities to celebrate Weekly Shōnen Jumps 40th anniversary. It was later released as a triple feature DVD with One Piece: Romance Dawn Story and Tegami Bachi: Light and Blue Night Fantasy in 2009, that was available only through a mail-in offer exclusive to Japanese residents. In 2013, it was included in the limited edition home video release of .
Another short film, Dragon Ball: Episode of Bardock, was shown at the Jump Festa 2012 event on December 17, 2011. It is an adaptation of the three part spin-off manga of the same name by Naho Ōishi that ran in V Jump from August to October 2011, which is a spin-off sequel to the TV special. It was later released on DVD in the February 3, 2012 issue of Saikyō Jump together with . The film was included subtitled in the European and North American exclusive Xbox 360 video game , released in October 2012.
! Japanese title !! English title !! Japanese release !! North American release
ORIGINAL VIDEO ANIMATIONS
Section::::Original video animations.
In 1993, Toei Animation, in cooperation with Weekly Shōnen Jump and V Jump, produced a two-part original video animation (OVA) that serves as a video strategy guide to the Family Computer game titled . The first volume was released on VHS on July 23, while the second was released on August 25. The animation was also used in the 1994 two part video games, True Plan to Eradicate the Saiyans, released for the Playdia. The complete OVA was included in the second Dragon Ball Z Dragon Box DVD set released in Japan in 2003.
The OVA was remade for the 2010 PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 video game under the title . It was included in Dragon Ball: Raging Blast 2 as a bonus feature, unlocked at the start of gameplay without any necessary cheat code or in-game achievement, presented in its original Japanese-language audio with subtitles appropriate for each region. It was later released on DVD in the February 3, 2012 issue of Saikyō Jump together with .
! Japanese title !! English title !! Japanese release !! North American release
EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS
Section::::Educational programs.
Two educational shorts based on the original Dragon Ball anime were produced in 1988. The first was a traffic safety special titled , while the second was a fire safety special titled . The two educational films were included in the Dragon Box DVD set released in Japan in 2004.
LIVE-ACTION FILMS
Section::::Live-action films.
! Title !! Release !! Production country
SEE ALSO
* List of Dragon Ball characters
* List of Dragon Ball manga volumes
* List of Dragon Ball episodes
* List of Dragon Ball Z episodes
* List of Dragon Ball GT episodes
* List of Dragon Ball Kai episodes
* List of Dragon Ball Super episodes
* List of Dragon Ball video games
* List of Dragon Ball soundtracks
NOTES
REFERENCES
