
RONNIE O'SULLIVAN
Ronald Antonio O'Sullivan, (born 5 December 1975) is an English professional snooker player. He is widely regarded as one of the greatest players in the history of the sport, having won five World Championships, seven Masters titles, and seven UK Championships; setting a record of 19 Triple Crown titles. His career total of 34 ranking titles is second only to Stephen Hendry's 36, while his career earnings of over £10 million puts him in first place on snooker's all-time prize-money list.
He holds the records for the most competitive century breaks, the most official maximum breaks in professional competition (15), and the fastest competitive maximum break, compiled in 5 minutes and 20 seconds at the 1997 World Championship. He has also played pool, including competing in early editions of the Mosconi Cup.
A child prodigy, O'Sullivan began playing snooker at age 7, made his first competitive century break at age 10, became British Under-16 Champion at age 13, and made his first competitive maximum break at age 15. After winning the IBSF World Under-21 Snooker Championship and Junior Pot Black in 1991, he turned professional in 1992, aged 16. His first major professional success came when he won the 1993 UK Championship at the age of 17 years and 358 days, making him the youngest player ever to win a ranking title, a record he still holds.
Noted for his mercurial temperament, as well as his struggles with alcohol, drugs, and depression, O'Sullivan has often been a controversial figure in the sport. He has received many warnings and sanctions from its governing body over his conduct and comments and has repeatedly threatened to retire. He took a break from the sport during the 2012/2013 season, and threatened in late 2018 to form a breakaway snooker tour. Outside his playing career, O'Sullivan has worked as a pundit for Eurosport's snooker coverage, has written crime novels and autobiographies, and has starred in a mini-series Ronnie O'Sullivan's American Hustle. He was awarded an OBE in the New Year's Honours list in 2016.
CAREER
PLAYING STYLE
Section::::Playing style.
O'Sullivan plays in a fast and attacking manner. He is a prolific breakbuilder and solid tactical player. He has stated his disdain for long, drawn-out games, saying that it harms the game of snooker. He is regarded by many other professionals as an excellent front-runner. In previous years, he could become demoralized by being behind and not playing well, and was liable to lose several consecutive frames. He is right-handed but can play to a very high standard with his left hand and routinely alternates where needed. While not quite possessing the same power in his left arm, being ambidextrous enables him to attempt shots with his left hand that would otherwise require awkward cueing with a or .
When he first displayed this left-handed ability in the 1996 World Championship against Alain Robidoux, the Canadian accused him of disrespect. He was summoned to a disciplinary hearing in response to Robidoux's formal complaint, where he had to prove that he could play to a high level with his left hand. He played three frames of snooker against former world championship runner-up Rex Williams, winning all three. The charge of bringing the game into disrepute was subsequently dropped.
STATUS
Section::::Status.
He is considered by many to be the most naturally talented player in the history of the sport, with some labelling him a "genius". Several of his peers regard him as the greatest player ever. However, a temperamental streak sometimes leads to O'Sullivan having a lack of confidence or interest, and he has performed inconsistently throughout his controversial career thus far, with observers noting the "two Ronnies" aspect of his character. According to Stephen Hendry after his defeat at the 2008 World Championship, "O'Sullivan is the best player in the world by a country mile". O'Sullivan has compiled the highest number of competitive century breaks in the sport's history, surpassing Hendry's previous record of 775. O'Sullivan has targeted reaching 1,000 century breaks before he retires.
O'Sullivan is one of the most popular players on the circuit, noted for being a "showman", and has helped improve the image of snooker to the general public. O'Sullivan himself has stated his desire for entertaining the watching public, and has said that slow, gritty games put viewers off. He has often been compared to Alex Higgins and Jimmy White, because of both his natural talent and popularity. O'Sullivan has three verified social network accounts, on Twitter, Sina Weibo, and Instagram, with over 300,000, over 160,000 and over 145,000 followers respectively. He updates his Weibo account with the help of two assistants who understand Chinese.
OTHER ENDEAVOURS
BROADCASTER
Section::::Other endeavours.
Section::::Broadcaster.
O'Sullivan started broadcasting regularly on Brentwood radio station Phoenix FM in May 2015, co-hosting the Midweek Matchzone show with Chris Hood. O'Sullivan has previously broadcast a number of hour-long specials for the station.
In March 2014, Eurosport announced that it had signed an exclusive deal with O'Sullivan to make him its global ambassador for snooker, with the goal of driving the sport's international appeal. As part of the deal, O'Sullivan creates an exclusive snooker series for the network called The Ronnie O'Sullivan Show, which includes his insights into the game, interviews with other professional players, and playing tips. He also wrote for Yahoo! websites and mobile apps during the World Championship.
O'Sullivan works for Eurosport with Jimmy White and Neal Foulds doing analysis for events that he does not take part in or if he is knocked out of an event he joins the team for the later rounds. O'Sullivan also starred in a mini series Ronnie O'Sullivan's American Hustle touring the United States with broadcasting friend Matt Smith. The series showed the pair travelling to different cities in the US learning the art of pool hustling.
AUTHOR
Section::::Author.
O'Sullivan has written three crime novels, titled Framed, which was published in 2016, Double Kiss and The Break. The novels are not autobiographical but are somewhat inspired by his early experiences and family life. O'Sullivan has also written two Autobiographies.
VIDEO GAMES
Section::::Video games.
O'Sullivan has been involved with several video games, including his own, released for PlayStation Portable, PlayStation 3 and PlayStation Vita on October 3, 2012 named Ronnie O'Sullivan's Snooker. He also worked on World Snooker Championship 2007 in 2007, and Virtual Snooker in 1996.
PERSONAL LIFE
Section::::Personal life.
O'Sullivan was born in Wordsley in the West Midlands. He grew up, and still lives, in the affluent Manor Road area of Chigwell, Essex. He attended Wanstead High School. His parents Ronald John O'Sullivan and Maria O'Sullivan (née Catalano) ran a string of sex shops in Soho. O'Sullivan's father was jailed in 1992 for murder, after stabbing father-of-two Bruce Bryan, and released 18 years later.
He is a cousin of female snooker player Maria Catalano, who has been ranked number one in the women's game.
O'Sullivan has three children: Taylor-Ann Magnus (born 1996) from a two-year relationship with Sally Magnus; and Lily (born 2006) and Ronnie (born 2007) from a relationship with Jo Langley, whom he met at Narcotics Anonymous. In February 2013, he became engaged to actress and former Strictly Come Dancing contestant Laila Rouass, with whom he had been in a relationship since early 2012. O'Sullivan became a grandfather in October 2018 after Taylor-Ann gave birth to her first child.
He has been labelled a perfectionist, and highly self-critical, even in victory. He suffered from clinical depression, and has had drugs and drink related problems in his early career. In 2011 he started working with the renowned sports psychologist Steve Peters, who has helped him overcome his mood swings. Noted for repeatedly declaring his intention to leave the sport, O'Sullivan worked during the 2012/2013 season on a pig farm.
In 2003, media sources carried reports that O'Sullivan had converted to Islam, but despite his self-professed interest in the faith, these reports were proved to be false. O'Sullivan also espouses an interest in Buddhism, having spent many lunchtimes at the London Buddhist Centre in Bethnal Green. However, he denies having a firm commitment to any religion.
O'Sullivan is a keen football fan and a supporter of Arsenal. Another of his hobbies is motor racing. In 2004, he appeared on Top Gear as the "Star in a", and finished with a time of 1:47.3 around the test track in a Suzuki Liana. He also succeeded in clearing a snooker table of four reds plus all the colours faster than the Stig was able to drive O'Sullivan's own Mercedes SL 500, with its "147" number plate, around the track. Over the weekend of 15–16 August 2009, in the Volkswagen Racing Cup at Silverstone using a Volkswagen Jetta with the car number "147", he drove two 20-minute rounds. In the first round, he spun off into a gravel trap, but fared better in the second, in which he finished 14th. O'Sullivan is also a keen runner, and runs for Woodford Green with Essex Ladies. He has a personal best of 34 minutes 54 seconds for 10 km races, which ranked him in the top 1500 of 10k runners in the United Kingdom in 2008. O'Sullivan also enjoys cooking, and has said that if he were to go back to school he would study cooking. This was reinforced by his appearance on BBC's Saturday Kitchen, in December 2014.
O'Sullivan joined the Labour Party, and became the first celebrity to endorse Jeremy Corbyn in the 2017 general election.
O'Sullivan is a close friend of Steve Peters, who has been influential on his career. He is also a close friend of British artist Damien Hirst.
PERFORMANCE AND RANKINGS TIMELINE
Section::::Performance and rankings timeline.
 bgcolor="#efefef"
! colspan="6"Performance Table Legend
CAREER FINALS
RANKING FINALS: 49 (34 TITLES, 15 RUNNERS-UP)
MINOR-RANKING FINALS: 6 (3 TITLES, 3 RUNNERS-UP)
NON-RANKING FINALS: 48 (32 TITLES, 16 RUNNERS-UP)
VARIANT FINALS: 3 (1 TITLE, 2 RUNNERS-UP)
PRO-AM FINALS: 1 (1 TITLE)
TEAM FINALS: 2 (2 TITLES)
AMATEUR FINALS: 4 (3 TITLES, 1 RUNNER-UP)
MAXIMUM AND CENTURY BREAKS
Section::::Maximum and Century breaks.
Ronnie O'Sullivan has completed 15 maximum breaks from his first in the 1997 World Snooker Championship against Mick Price; to his 2018 English Open maximum against Allan Taylor. O'Sullivan's maximum in 1997 also holds the record for the fastest maximum in competitive play, at 5 minutes and 20 seconds.
O'Sullivan has refused to complete maximum breaks due to opinions on the maximum break prizes. In the 2016 Welsh Open, O'Sullivan intentionally played a pink ball, and recorded a 146 break due to the maximum break prize being at £10,000. Six years earlier, at the 2010 World Open, referee Jan Verhaas convinced O'Sullivan to complete the break, in which O'Sullivan had turned down.
O'Sullivan also holds the record for the total amount of s. He has compiled 986 century breaks in competition in his 26 year professional career.
PRIZE MONEY
Section::::Prize money.
O'Sullivan began the 2017/2018 season with £9.0 million (to the nearest £100,000) career total prize earnings.
Since then, O'Sullivan has won the following prize money amounts per season, leaving his career total at:
!width="300"Season
!width="200"Prize money won (£)
Last updated on: 10 December 2018.
FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Profile at worldsnooker.com
* Profile at Snooker.org
