
SANGRE DE CRISTO MOUNTAINS
The Sangre de Cristo Mountains (Spanish for "Blood of Christ") are the southernmost subrange of the Rocky Mountains. They are located in southern Colorado and northern New Mexico in the United States. The mountains run from Poncha Pass in South-Central Colorado, trending southeast and south, ending at Glorieta Pass, southeast of Santa Fe, New Mexico.
The mountains contain a number of fourteen thousand foot peaks in the Colorado portion, as well as all the peaks in New Mexico which are over thirteen thousand feet.
The name of the mountains may refer to the occasional reddish hues observed during sunrise and sunset, and when alpenglow occurs, especially when the mountains are covered with snow. Although the particular origin of the name is unclear, it has been in use since the early 19th century. Before that time the terms "La Sierra Nevada", "La Sierra Madre", "La Sierra", and "The Snowies" (used by English speakers) were used. According to tradition, "sangre de Cristo" were the last words of a Catholic priest who was killed by Indians. Sometimes the archaic Spanish spelling "Christo" is used.
LAND MANAGEMENT AND RECREATION OVERVIEW
Section::::Land management and recreation overview.
Much of the mountains are within various National Forests: the Rio Grande and San Isabel in Colorado, and the Carson and Santa Fe in New Mexico. These publicly accessible areas are popular for hunting, camping, hiking, mountain biking, backpacking, climbing, and cross-country and downhill skiing.
The mountains include two large wilderness areas, the Sangre de Cristo Wilderness in Colorado and the Pecos Wilderness in New Mexico, as well as some smaller wilderness areas, such as Latir Peak Wilderness. The Great Sand Dunes National Park and Preserve lies on the southwest side of the mountains in Colorado.
SUBRANGES
Section::::Subranges.
The Sangre de Cristo Mountains are divided into various subranges, described here from north to south. Use of the terms "Sangre de Cristo Range" and "Sangre de Cristo Mountains" is inconsistent and either may refer to either the northernmost subrange, the southernmost subrange, or the mountains as a whole.
SANGRE DE CRISTO RANGE
Section::::Sangre de Cristo Range.
The Sangre de Cristo Range, the largest and most northerly subrange of the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, runs directly along the east side of the Rio Grande Rift, extending southeast from Poncha Pass for about 75 miles (120 km) through south-central Colorado to La Veta Pass, approximately 20 miles (32 km) west of Walsenburg. They form a high ridge separating the San Luis Valley on the west from the watershed of the Arkansas River on the east.
CRESTONES
Section::::Crestones.
The Crestones are a group of four 14,000+ foot (4,268+ m) peaks (fourteeners) in the Sangre de Cristo Range above Crestone, Colorado.
SPANISH PEAKS
Section::::Spanish Peaks.
The Spanish Peaks are a pair of mountains, West Spanish Peak, , and East Spanish Peak, , located in southwestern Huerfano County, Colorado. The Spanish Peaks were designated a National Natural Landmark in 1976 as one of the best known examples of igneous dikes. The mountains can be seen from as far as to the north from Colorado Springs, to the west from Alamosa, Colorado, to the south from Raton, New Mexico, and to the east from La Junta, Colorado.
CULEBRA RANGE
Section::::Culebra Range.
The Culebra Range runs almost due north and south, with its northern limit at La Veta Pass in Colorado, and its southern limit at Costilla Creek, just south of Big Costilla Peak in New Mexico. Its highest point is Culebra Peak at , which is notable for being the only fourteener in Colorado which is on private land. Climbers wishing to ascend Culebra must pay a fee (currently US$100 per person), and the number of climbers per year is limited. It is also the most southerly fourteener in the U.S. Rockies. Standing to the east of the main crest are the two prominent Spanish Peaks (West: , East: ). These peaks were important landmarks on the mountain branch of the Santa Fe Trail.The bioregion receives very little water and has an annual precipitation of .This region is also home to the Culebra Micro-basin which has a rich agricultural history in the state of Colorado.
TAOS MOUNTAINS
Section::::Taos Mountains.
The Taos Mountains span the western lobe of the range from Costilla Creek in the north, to Tres Ritos in the south. They include the highest point in New Mexico, Wheeler Peak, at , which is part of the Wheeler Peak Wilderness. Other notable peaks include Pueblo Peak, which at rises dramatically above Taos Pueblo, and Latir Peak, at . Williams Lake is located below Wheeler Peak in the Wheeler Peak Wilderness.
Taos Ski Valley lies just to the west of Wheeler Peak. Much of the central portion of the Taos Mountains are on Taos Pueblo land. As viewed from Taos, they are locally called "Taos Mountain."
The southern portion of the Taos Mountains, between Palo Flechado Pass and Tres Ritos (U.S. Route 64 and NM Route 518), is lower and less dramatic than the northern section, with its high point being Cerro Vista, . The Fernando Mountains are a small subrange lying in this section, just south of US Route 64.
CIMARRON RANGE
Section::::Cimarron Range.
The Cimarron Range lies across the Moreno Valley to the east of the Taos Mountains. It is a lower range, with its highest point being Baldy Mountain at . The Philmont Scout Ranch lies on the east side of the Cimarron Range.
RINCON MOUNTAINS
Section::::Rincon Mountains.
This is a minor subrange, significantly lower than the rest of the Sangre de Cristos; it lies east of the southernmost portion of the Taos Mountains.
SANTA FE MOUNTAINS
Section::::Santa Fe Mountains.
Rounding out the Sangre de Cristo Mountains are the Santa Fe Mountains, which include all peaks south of NM Route 518. This group lies near Santa Fe and surrounds the Pecos Wilderness, which protects the source watershed of the Pecos River. The peaks include Truchas Peak, , as their highest point. Other notable peaks are Santa Fe Baldy () and Jicarita Peak (). The Pecos Wilderness is crossed by many trails and is popular for backpacking and for fishing in its high alpine lakes.
PROMINENT PEAKS
Section::::Prominent peaks.
+Peaks
!Rank
!Mountain Peak
!Subrange
!Elevation
!Prominence
!Isolation
! Image
! Comment
align=center1
Blanca Peak
Sierra Blanca
Blanca Peak in Colorado is the highest peak of the Sangre de Cristo mountains.
align=center2
Crestone Peak
Crestones
align=center3
Culebra Peak
Culebra Range
align=center4
West Spanish Peak
Spanish Peaks
align=center5
Mount Herard
Sangre de Cristo Range
align=center6
Wheeler Peak
Taos Mountains
Wheeler Peak, of the Wheeler Peak Wilderness, is the highest peak in New Mexico. Taos Ski Valley lies just to the west of Wheeler Peak. Much of the central portion of the Taos Mountains are on Taos Pueblo land. As viewed from Taos, they are locally called "Taos Mountain." 
align=center7
Bushnell Peak
Sangre de Cristo Range
align=center8
Truchas Peak
Santa Fe Mountains
Truchas Peak is the highest point in the Santa Fe Mountains. (Image: Truchas Peak in winter from Española, New Mexico)
align=center9
Venado Peak
Taos Mountains
align=center10
East Spanish Peak
Spanish Peaks
align=center11
Santa Fe Baldy
Santa Fe Mountains 
Santa Fe Baldy is a prominent summit in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains of New Mexico, located 15 mi (24 km) northeast of Santa Fe. It is prominent as seen from Los Alamos and communities along the Rio Grande in northern New Mexico, but is relatively inconspicuous from Santa Fe, as its north-south trending main ridge line is seen nearly end-on, disguising the size of the mountain. Santa Fe Baldy lies in the Pecos Wilderness within the Santa Fe National Forest, on the water divide between the Rio Grande and the Pecos River. 
align=center12
Baldy Mountain
Cimarron Range
align=center13
Greenhorn Mountain
Wet Mountains
Greenhorn Mountain is the highest point in the Wet Mountains of southern Colorado, just high enough to pass tree line which is about in this part of Colorado. The massive mountain can be seen from Pueblo and all along Interstate 25. The mountain is protected within the secluded Greenhorn Mountain Wilderness Area but is accessed by a few trails and a nearby 4-wheel drive road to the north.
align=center14
Mount Zwischen
Sangre de Cristo Range
align=center15
Cerro Vista
Cerro Vista 
align=center16
Mount Phillips
Cimarron Range
align=center17
Mount Mestas
Sierra Blanca
align=center18
Iron Mountain
Sierra Blanca
SEE ALSO
* Glorieta Pass
* Valle Vidal
* Vietnam Veterans Memorial State Park
* Southern Rocky Mountains
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sangre de Cristo Mountains @ Peakbagger
* List of the 13-ers in Sangre de Cristo
* NPS—TwHP: "Glorieta and Raton Passes: Gateways to the Southwest" — a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) lesson plan.
