
ARMY SERVICE RIBBON
The Army Service Ribbon (ASR) is a military award of the United States Army that was established by the Secretary of the Army on 10 April 1981 as announced in Department of the Army General Order 15, dated 10 October 1990.
HISTORY
Section::::History.
Effective 1 August 1981, all members of the Army, Army National Guard, and United States Army Reserve in an active reserve status were eligible for the award. The ribbon may be awarded retroactively to those personnel who completed the required training before 1 August 1981 provided they had an Active Army status as defined above on or after 1 August 1981.
The Army Service Ribbon is awarded to members of the Army, Army Reserve, and Army National Guard for successful completion of initial-entry training, which for officers is considered to be successful completion of their basic/orientation or higher level course. Enlisted soldiers will be awarded the ribbon upon successful completion of their initial MOS producing course. If a soldier is assigned a MOS based on civilian or other branch of service-acquired skills, this ribbon will be awarded on honorable completion of 4 months active service.
For those service members who completed initial entry training prior to 1981, the Army Service Ribbon is retroactively awarded, provided the service member was still on active duty after 1981. For those service members who enlist in the Army after serving with another service (and who may not be required to complete initial entry training) the Army Service Ribbon is awarded after four months of active service.
The Army Service Ribbon is presented as a one-time award only since it is not possible to earn it more than once. The United States Air Force equivalent of the Army Service Ribbon is the Air Force Training Ribbon. Neither the U.S. Navy nor the U.S. Marine Corps have a direct equivalent, though the Basic Training Honor Graduate Ribbon is awarded to the top 3% of each graduating class.
The Army Service ribbon is a multi-colored (red, orange, yellow, green and blue) ribbon to represent the entire spectrum of military specialties in which officers and enlisted soldiers may enter upon completion of their initial training.
SEE ALSO
* Awards and decorations of the United States Army
* Basic Training Honor Graduate Ribbon
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
