
BUGATTI VEYRON
The Bugatti Veyron EB 16.4 is a mid-engined sports car, designed and developed in Germany by the Volkswagen Group and manufactured in Molsheim, France, by Bugatti. It was named after the racing driver Pierre Veyron.
The original version has a top speed of . It was named Car of the Decade and best car award (2000–2009) by the BBC television programme Top Gear. The standard Bugatti Veyron also won Top Gears Best Car Driven All Year award in 2005.
The Super Sport version of the Veyron is recognised by Guinness World Records as the fastest street-legal production car in the world, with a top speed of . The roadster Veyron Grand Sport Vitesse version was the fastest roadster in the world, reaching an averaged top speed of in a test on 6 April, 2013. 
The Veyron's chief designer was Hartmut Warkuss and the exterior was designed by Jozef Kabaň of Volkswagen, with much of the engineering work being conducted under the guidance of engineering chief Wolfgang Schreiber. The Veyron includes a sound system designed and built by Burmester Audiosysteme.
Several special variants have been produced. In December, 2010, Bugatti began offering prospective buyers the ability to customise exterior and interior colours by using the Veyron 16.4 Configurator application on the marque's official website. The Bugatti Veyron was discontinued in late 2014.
ORIGINS
Section::::Origins.
In May 1998, Volkswagen AG acquired the rights to use the Bugatti logo and the trade name Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S. To succeed the EB 110 model produced under previous ownership, the maker quickly released a series of concept cars that would culminate in the Bugatti Veyron 16.4.
Between October 1998 and September 1999, Bugatti introduced a series of Giugiaro-designed concept vehicles, each with permanent four-wheel drive and powered by the Volkswagen-designed W18 engine. The first, the EB118, was a 2-door coupé presented at the 1998 Paris Motor Show. The next, the EB218, was a 4-door sedan presented at the 1999 Geneva Motor Show. A third, the 18/3 Chiron, was a mid-engined sports car presented at the 1999 International Motor Show in Frankfurt.
In October, 1999, Bugatti unveiled a fourth concept car at the Tokyo Motor Show. The EB 18/4 Veyron was a mid-engined supercar styled in-house under the direction of Hartmut Warkuß. In 2000, a modified version, the EB 16/4 Veyron, was displayed at motor shows in Detroit, Geneva, and Paris. Rather than the three-bank W-18 of the four previous concepts, the EB 16/4 featured the four-bank W16 engine architecture installed in every production example of the Bugatti Veyron.
The decision to start production of the car was made by the Volkswagen Group in 2001. The first roadworthy prototype was completed in August 2003. It is identical to the later series variant except for a few details. In the transition from development to series production considerable technical problems had to be addressed, repeatedly delaying production until September 2005.
The Veyron EB 16.4 is named in honour of Pierre Veyron, a Bugatti development engineer, test driver and company race driver who, with co-driver Jean-Pierre Wimille, won the 1939 24 Hours of Le Mans while driving a Bugatti. The "EB" refers to Bugatti founder Ettore Bugatti and the "16.4" refers to the engine's 16 cylinders and 4 turbochargers.
BUGATTI VEYRON (2005–2011)
SPECIFICATIONS AND PERFORMANCE
Section::::Bugatti Veyron (2005–2011).
Section::::Specifications and performance.
The Veyron features an 8.0-litre, quad-turbocharged, W16 cylinder engine, equivalent to two narrow-angle V8 engines bolted together. Each cylinder has four valves for a total of 64, but the configuration of each bank allows two overhead camshafts to drive two banks of cylinders so only four camshafts are needed. The engine is fed by four turbochargers and displaces , with a square bore and stroke.
The transmission is a dual-clutch direct-shift computer-controlled automatic transmission with seven gear ratios, with magnesium paddles behind the steering wheel and a shift time of less than 150 milliseconds, built by Ricardo of England rather than Borg-Warner, who designed the six speed DSG used in the mainstream Volkswagen Group marques. The Veyron can be driven in either semi-automatic or fully automatic mode. A replacement transmission for the Veyron costs just over . It also has permanent all-wheel drive using the Haldex Traction system. It uses special Michelin PAX run-flat tyres, designed specifically to accommodate the Veyron's top speed, and cost per set. The tyres can be mounted on the wheels only in France, a service which costs . Kerb weight is . This gives the car a power-to-weight ratio, according to Volkswagen Group's figures, of per ton.
The car's wheelbase is . Overall length is which gives of overhang. The width is and height . The Bugatti Veyron has a total of ten radiators:
* 3 heat exchangers for the air-to-liquid intercoolers.
* 3 engine radiators.
* 1 for the air conditioning system.
* 1 transmission oil radiator.
* 1 differential oil radiator.
* 1 engine oil radiator
It has a (normal condition) and (after lowering to the ground), and a frontal area of . This gives it a drag area, the product of drag coefficient and frontal area, of .
ENGINE OUTPUT
Section::::Engine output.
According to Volkswagen Group and certified by TÜV Süddeutschland, the final production Veyron engine produces of motive power, and generates of torque. The nominal figure has been stated by Bugatti officials to be conservative, with the real total being at 6,000 rpm.
TOP SPEED
Section::::Top speed.
German inspection officials recorded an average top speed of the original version at during test sessions on Volkswagen Group's private Ehra-Lessien test track on 19 April, 2005.
This top speed was almost matched by James May on Top Gear in November, 2006, at the Ehra-Lessien test track, at . May noted that at top speed the engine consumes of air per minute (as much as a human breathes in four days). Back in the Top Gear studio, co-presenter Jeremy Clarkson commented that most supercars felt like they were shaking apart at their top speed, and asked May if that was the case with the Veyron at . May responded that the Veyron was very controlled, and only wobbled slightly when the air brake deployed.
The car's everyday top speed is listed at . When the car reaches , hydraulics lower the car until it has a ground clearance of about . At the same time, the wing and spoiler deploy. In this handling mode, the wing provides of downforce, holding the car to the road.
Top speed mode must be entered while the vehicle is at rest. Its driver must toggle a special top speed key to the left of their seat, which triggers a checklist to establish whether the car and its driver are ready to attempt to reach . If so, the rear spoiler retracts, the front air diffusers shut, and normal ground clearance drops to .
BRAKING
Section::::Braking.
The Veyron's brakes use cross drilled, radially vented carbon fibre reinforced silicon carbide (C/SiC) composite discs, manufactured by SGL Carbon, The lightweight aluminium alloy monobloc brake calipers are made by AP Racing; the fronts have eight titanium pistons and the rear calipers have six pistons. Bugatti claims maximum deceleration of 1.3 g on road tyres. As an added safety feature, in the event of brake failure, an anti-lock braking system (ABS) has also been installed on the handbrake.
Prototypes have been subjected to repeated 1.0 g braking from to without fade. With the car's acceleration from to , that test can be performed every 22 seconds. At speeds above , the rear wing also acts as an airbrake, snapping to a 55° angle in 0.4 seconds once brakes are applied, providing an additional 0.68 g (6.66 m/s) of deceleration (equivalent to the stopping power of an ordinary hatchback). Bugatti claims the Veyron will brake from to a standstill in less than 10 seconds, though distance covered in this time will be half a kilometre (third of a mile).
BUGATTI VEYRON 16.4 GRAND SPORT (2009–2015)
Section::::Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Grand Sport (2009–2015).
The targa top version of the Bugatti Veyron EB 16.4, dubbed the Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Grand Sport, was unveiled at the 2008 Pebble Beach Concours d'Elegance. It has extensive reinforcements to compensate for the lack of a standard roof and small changes to the windshield and running lights. Two removable tops are included, the second a temporary arrangement fashioned after an umbrella. The top speed with the hardtop in place is the same as the standard coupé version, but with the roof down is limited to —and to with the temporary soft roof. The Grand Sport edition was limited to 150 units, with the first 50 going exclusively to registered Bugatti customers. Production began in the second quarter of 2009, with the car priced at (excluding taxes and delivery).
A version was introduced at the 2012 Qatar Motor Show with a horizontal colour split with a bright yellow body framed in visible black carbon (including black-tinted wheels), seats in yellow-coloured leather upholstery with black stitching, middle console in black carbon, dashboard, steering wheel and gearshift made of black leather with yellow stitching. It was priced at .
BUGATTI VEYRON 16.4 SUPER SPORT, WORLD RECORD EDITION (2010–2011)
Section::::Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Super Sport, World Record Edition (2010–2011).
The Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Super Sport is a faster, more powerful version of the Bugatti Veyron 16.4. Production is limited to 30 units. The Super Sport has increased engine power of at 6,400 rpm and a maximum torque of at 3,000–5,000 rpm, and a revised aerodynamic package. The Super Sport has a top speed, making it the fastest production road car on the market when it was released although it is electronically limited to to protect the tyres from disintegrating.
The Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Super Sport World Record Edition is a version of the Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Super Sport. It is limited to five units. It has an orange body detailing, orange wheels, and a special black exposed carbon body. The electronic limiter is also removed with this version.
The vehicle was unveiled in 2010 at The Quail, followed by the 2010 Monterey Historic Races at Laguna Seca, and the 2010 Pebble Beach Concours d'Elegance.
The Super Sport is valued at .
TOP SPEED WORLD RECORD
Section::::Top Speed World Record.
On 4 July 2010 James May, a television presenter on BBC Two's television show Top Gear, drove the Veyron Super Sport at . Later that day, Bugatti's official test driver Pierre Henri Raphanel drove the Super Sport version of the Veyron on Volkswagen's Ehra-Lessien (near Wolfsburg, Germany) high-speed test track to establish the car's top speed. With representatives of the Guinness Book of Records and German Technical Inspection Agency (TÜV) on hand, Raphanel made passes around the big oval in both directions achieving an average maximum speed of , thus taking back the title from the SSC Ultimate Aero TT as the fastest production vehicle of all time. The 431.072 km/h mark was reached by averaging the Super Sport's two test runs, the first reaching and the second .
When the record was certified it was already well-known to the public that the customer car would be electronically limited to .
Yet, after a query by the Sunday Times Guinness' PR director Jaime Strang was quoted on 5 April 2013: "As the car's speed limiter was deactivated, this modification was against the official guidelines. Consequently, the vehicle's record set at 431.072 km/h is no longer valid." 
On 10 April 2013 it was written on its website: "Guinness World Records would like to confirm that Bugatti's record has not been disqualified; the record category is currently under review."
On 15 April 2013 Bugatti's speed record was confirmed: "Following a thorough review conducted with a number of external experts, Guinness World Records is pleased to announce the confirmation of Bugatti's record of Fastest production car achieved by the Veyron 16.4 Super Sport. The focus of the review was with respect to what may constitute a modification to a car's standard specification. Having evaluated all the necessary information, Guinness World Records is now satisfied that a change to the speed limiter does not alter the fundamental design of the car or its engine."
BUGATTI VEYRON 16.4 GRAND SPORT VITESSE (2012–2015)
Section::::Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Grand Sport Vitesse (2012–2015).
The Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Grand Sport Vitesse is a targa top version of the Veyron Super Sport. It produces a maximum output of at 6,400 rpm and a maximum torque of at 3,000–5,000 rpm. These figures allow the car to accelerate from a stand still to in 2.6 seconds. On normal roads, the Vitesse is electronically limited to .
The vehicle was first unveiled at the 2012 Geneva Motor Show and later appeared at the 2012 Beijing Auto Show and the 2012 São Paulo Motor Show.
The Base price of the Vitesse is (without tax and transportation), with the car shown at the Geneva Motor Show costing and the car shown at the São Paulo Motor Show costing .
SPECIAL EDITIONS
Section::::Special editions.
A number of special editions of the Vitesse were made. The Vitesse SE, inspired by Bugatti Type 37A, was unveiled in 2012 and sold for (). The World Record Car (WRC) Edition was limited to 8 units, debuted in 2013, and went on sale for .
In 2013, Bugatti produced a series of Vitesse dedicated to racing legends, including Jean-Pierre Wimille Jean Bugatti, Meo Costantini, and Ettore Bugatti.
RECORDS
Section::::Records.
A Bugatti Veyron 16.4 Grand Sport Vitesse driven by the Chinese racing driver Anthony Liu at Volkswagen Group's proving grounds in Ehra-Lessien became the fastest open-top production sports car, with a top speed of .
After the world record attempt, Dr. Wolfgang Schreiber, President of Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S, said "When we introduced the Vitesse, we established the top speed for open-top driving to be 375 km/h. Still, we could not let go of the idea of reaching the 400 km/h mark with this car as well. The fact that we have succeeded in reaching 408.84 km/h is a thrill for me, and it reaffirms once again that Bugatti is the leader when it comes to technology in the international automotive industry." The driver, Anthony Liu, claimed "Even at such high speeds it remained incredibly comfortable and stable. With an open top, you can really experience the sound of the engine and yet even at higher speeds I did not get compromised by the wind at all."
SPECIFICATIONS
Section::::Specifications.
!colspan="4"Basic specifications
!Layout and body style
Mid-engine, four-wheel drive, two-door coupé/targa top
!Base price
!Internal combustion engine
8.0 litre W16, 64v 2xDOHC quad-turbocharged petrol engine
!Engine displacement and max. power
@6000 rpmSuper Sport:@6400 rpm
!colspan="3"Performance
! 
Standard 
Super Sport 
! Top Speed
! 0-
colspan="2"2.46 seconds
! 0-
! 0-
! 0-
! Standing quarter-mile (402 m)
! Standing mile (1609 m)
! Braking from 
colspan="2" 31.4 m
! 0-200-0 mph
! Lateral acceleration
!colspan="4"Fuel economy
!EPA city driving
!EPA highway driving
!colspan="2"Top speed fuel economy
colspan="2", or per minute
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production.
, 405 Veyrons have been produced and delivered to customers worldwide, with orders have already been placed for another 30. Bugatti was reported to produce 300 coupes and 150 roadsters up to the end of 2015.
Only 450 Bugatti Veyrons were produced in a span of over 10 years. The final production vehicle, a Grand Sport Vitesse titled "La Finale" (The Last One), was displayed at the Geneva Motor Show from 5–15 March 2015.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Future development.
In 2008, Bugatti then-CEO Dr Franz-Josef Paefgen confirmed that the Veyron would be replaced by another high-end model by 2012. In 2011, the new CEO Wolfgang Dürheimer revealed that the company was planning to produce two models in the future — one a sports car-successor to the Veyron, the other a limousine known as the Bugatti 16C Galibier, which was later cancelled since Bugatti was later then working on a successor to the Veyron, which became the Bugatti Chiron.
Originally the new model due in 2016 was meant to be no faster or more powerful than the Super Sport. This was later changed after a faster and more powerful in-game counterpart of the Super Sport appeared in Gran Turismo 6, known as the Bugatti Vision Gran Turismo. The Vision Gran Turismo debuted at the September 2015 Frankfurt Motor Show.
A toned-down version of the Vision Gran Turismo concept car, now called the Chiron, debuted at the March 2016 Geneva Motor Show. Production started in 2017 and will be limited to 500 units.
SALES
Section::::Sales.
! Year
! scope="col"  Units sold
2005
5
2006
44
2007
81
2008
71
2009
50
2010
40
2011
38
2012
31
2013
47
Total
407 ISI
* The last Veyron, N 450 was sold May 2014.
* 
RECEPTION
TOP GEAR
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Top Gear.
All three former presenters of the popular BBC motoring show Top Gear have given the Veyron considerable praise. While initially skeptical that the Veyron would ever be produced, Jeremy Clarkson later declared the Veyron "the greatest car ever made and the greatest car we will ever see in our lifetime", comparing it to Concorde and S.S. Great Britain. He also pointed out that the actual production cost of a Bugatti Veyron car was , but was sold to customers for just . When asked why, he jokingly said that Volkswagen designed the car merely as a "Technical Exercise". James May described the Veyron as "our Concorde moment." Clarkson test drove the Veyron from Alba in northern Italy to London in a race against May and Richard Hammond who made the journey in a Cessna 182 aeroplane.
A few episodes later, May drove the Veyron at the VW test track and took it to its top speed of . In series 10, Hammond raced the Veyron against the Eurofighter Typhoon and lost. He also raced the car in Series 13 against a McLaren F1 driven by The Stig in a one-mile (1.6 km) drag race in Abu Dhabi. The commentary focused on Bugatti's "amazing technical achievement" versus the "non-gizmo" racing purity of the F1. While the F1 was quicker off the line and remained ahead until both cars were travelling at approximately 200 km/h, the Bugatti overtook its competitor from 200 to 300 km/h and emerged the victor. Hammond has stated that he did not use the Veyron's launch control in order to make the race more interesting.
The Veyron also won the award for "Car of the Decade" in Top Gear's end of 2010 award show. Clarkson commented "It was a car that just rewrote the rule book really, an amazing piece of engineering, a genuine Concorde moment". When the standard version was tested in 2008, it did not reach the top of the lap time leader board, with a time of 1:18.3, which was speculated as being due to the car's considerable weight disadvantage against the other cars towards the top. In 2010 the Super Sport version achieved the fastest ever time of 1:16.8 (dethroned the Gumpert Apollo S, replaced by the Ariel Atom V8 in 2011), as well as being taken to a verified average top speed of by Raphanel on the programme, thenceforth retaking its position as the fastest production car in the world.
MARTIN ROACH
Section::::Martin Roach.
In 2011, Martin Roach's book Bugatti Veyron: A Quest for Perfection – The Story of the Greatest Car in the World took the stance that the car had now become so famous that it is effectively a bona fide celebrity. The book follows its author as he attempts to track down and drive the car, along the way interviewing chief designers, test drivers, and the president of Bugatti.
GORDON MURRAY
Section::::Gordon Murray.
During its development period McLaren F1 designer Gordon Murray said in UK auto magazine Evo: "The most pointless exercise on the planet has got to be this four-wheel-drive, thousand-horsepower Bugatti." But after driving it he called it "a huge achievement".
Murray was impressed with the Veyron's engine and transmission after he test drove one for Road and Track magazine. He also praised its styling: "The styling is a wonderful mélange of classic curves and mechanical edges and elements — this should ensure that the car will still look good years from now, and therefore have a chance of becoming a future classic."
SEE ALSO
* List of fastest production cars
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
