
CROSSOVER (AUTOMOBILE)
Crossover, or crossover SUV, are terms predominantly used in the United States for vehicles with sport utility vehicle (SUV) styling features that are based on passenger car platforms and are only intended for light off-road use. Models which are classified as crossovers in the United States are classified as SUVs in other countries.
The 1948 Willys-Overland Jeepster convertible coupe is considered the earliest ancestor to the crossover, however the first model considered to be a crossover was the AMC Eagle, which was released in 1979. 
In the United States, more than 50% of the overall SUV market was crossover models in 2006.
DEFINITION
Section::::Definition.
A crossover is a vehicle with SUV styling features that is based on a passenger car platform. The early crossovers resembled small SUVs or large wagons. Crossovers have ride, handling, performance and fuel economy characteristics similar to cars and are only intended for light off-road use.
Crossovers are sometimes referred to as "crossover SUVs". Models which are classified as crossovers in the United States (such as the Toyota Highlander and Honda CR-V) are classified as SUVs in other countries.
ORIGIN
Section::::Origin.
Among the earliest ancestors of what evolved into the modern crossover was the 1948 Willys-Overland Jeepster convertible coupe, which combined car-like features with off-road capabilities.
The Jensen FF luxury coupe, with 320 units produced from 1966-1971, was the first car platform equipped with four-wheel drive.
In 1972, the Greek company Neorion designed a four-wheel drive luxury car which used the engine from the Jeep Wagoneer (SJ). Four prototypes were built, however the model did not reach production. Another contender before the crossover description became common was the 1977 Matra Rancho.
Introduced in 1979, the AMC Eagle is often identified as the first crossover SUV, prior to the terms SUV or crossover being used. The mass-market Eagle model line was based on a unibody passenger car platform, with fully automatic four-wheel drive and a raised ride-height.
The 1988 Suzuki Vitara is considered to be an early crossover SUV. Another early crossover is the 1996 Toyota RAV4, because it was built on a passenger car platform.
POPULARITY
EUROPE
Section::::Popularity.
Section::::Europe.
Since the early 2010s, sales of crossover-type vehicles has been increasing in Europe. By 2017, European sales of compact and midsized crossover models continued to surge.
UNITED STATES
Section::::United States.
By 2006, the segment came into strong visibility in the U.S., when crossover sales "made up more than 50% of the overall SUV market". Sales increased in 2007 by 16%. For Audi, the Audi Q5 has become their second best-selling vehicle in the United States market after the Audi A4 sedan. Around half of Lexus' sales volume come from its SUVs since the late 1990s, the big majority of which is the Lexus RX crossover.
In the U.S., domestic manufacturers were slow to switch from their emphasis on light truck-based SUVs, and foreign automakers developed crossovers targeting the U.S. market, as an alternative to station wagons that are unpopular there. But by the 2010 model year, domestic automakers had quickly caught up. The segment has strong appeal to aging baby boomers.
MODELS
Section::::Models.
Crossovers have been produced in size categories ranging from subcompact and compact to mid-size.
SEE ALSO
* Car classification
* Compact SUV
* List of SUVs
* Mini SUV
* Minivan
* Recreational vehicle
REFERENCES
