
FORD EXPEDITION
The Ford Expedition is a Full-size SUV manufactured by Ford. Introduced for the 1997 model year as the successor of the Ford Bronco, the Expedition was the first full-size Ford SUV sold with a four-door body. For its entire production life, the Ford Expedition has been derived from the corresponding generation of the Ford F-150 in production, sharing some body and mechanical components. The fourth-generation Ford Expedition began production for the 2018 model year. Similar to the configuration of the Chevrolet Tahoe and Suburban, the Ford Expedition is sold in regular and extended lengths (the Ford Expedition EL/Max); sold since 2007, the latter functionally serves as the replacement for the Ford Excursion.
Since 1997, the Lincoln division has marketed the Ford Expedition as the Lincoln Navigator, the first full-size SUV sold by a luxury auto brand in North America (the Expedition was never sold as a Mercury). The third Ford vehicle to use the Expedition nameplate, the full-size SUV follows a 1992 F-150 Eddie Bauer concept vehicle and a 1995 trim level package on the two-door Ford Explorer Sport.
Prior to 2009, the Ford Expedition was assembled at the Michigan Assembly Plant in Wayne, Michigan (previously home to the Ford Bronco)., After 2009, the Ford Expedition was moved to the Kentucky Truck Plant in Louisville, Kentucky.
VEHICLE BACKGROUND
Section::::Vehicle background.
The Expedition offered up to nine-passenger seating in model years before 2009 (with a front bench seat option in the first row); 2009–present has bucket seats in the first row and seats eight passengers. It is equipped with a V8 engine. It is similar to the Lincoln Navigator, especially in Limited (2005–present) or King Ranch (2005–2017) high-end trims; both of which were introduced for the 2005 model year. With the 2011 model year, the base model was designated XL, an upgraded XLT, and new for 2011 XLT Premium that replaced the Eddie Bauer trim (1997–2010) which was phased out from the entire Ford vehicle lineup. As of 2010, over 1,545,241 Expeditions (both standard and EL/Max) have been sold. A modified Special Service Vehicle version is available for law enforcement agencies, fire departments, and emergency medical services.
The Ford Expedition is also known for being one of the longest-lasting vehicles on the road. With 5% of vehicles over 200K miles, it landed the #4 spot in a 2016 study by iSeeCars.com listing the top 10 longest-lasting vehicles. The Expedition is also the last current Ford vehicle to retain its classic older look from the late 1990s and early-mid 2000s Ford vehicles with its triangular-styled taillamps and rounded-rectangular shaped headlamps along with the overall boxy shape of the body.
FIRST GENERATION (1997–2002)
Section::::First generation (1997–2002).
Known internally at Ford as the UN93, the first generation Expedition was developed under the UN93 program from 1993 to 1996, headed by chief engineer Dale Claudepierre at a cost of $1.3 billion USD. Initial planning began in 1991 parallel to PN96 F-Series development, prior to the UN93 program fully being approved in 1993. Styling approval was completed in early 1993 (3 1/2 years ahead of 1996 production) under design chief Bob Aikins, with the UN93 design being frozen by September 1993, at 34 months prior to July 1996 production commencement.
The all-new full-size SUV was unveiled on May 9, 1996 and launched on October 2, 1996 as a 1997 model. It replaced the aging two-door Ford Bronco. The XLT was the base model. The Expedition featured optional three row seating, first row captains chair seating, available second row captains chair seating, leather seating surfaces, illuminated running boards, heated side view mirrors, power moon roof, dual zone climate control and Ford's Mach audio sound system with rear subwoofer. Many of these features were standard on the Eddie Bauer version.
Expedition was available with automatic full-time ControlTrac four-wheel drive with two-speed dual range BorgWarner 4406 transfer case and a center multi-disc differential. ControlTrac was introduced in 1995 and included four selectable modes: Two High, Auto, Four High (lock) and Four Low (lock). Two High mode and Auto mode with auto-lock was not available.
A short- & long-arm (SLA) independent front suspension with speed-sensitive power-assisted steering was combined with a multi-link rear live axle. Optional equipment included off-road under-body skid-plate protection, Traction-Lok rear limited-slip differential, and a heavy-duty trailer towing package.
Optional was an electronically controlled pneumatic air suspension system that would raise and lower the vehicle depending on road and load conditions. The system also included a kneel-down mode for easier ingress and egress, as well as loading cargo,
Standard was the 4.6 liter Triton V8 with the 5.4 liter version optional. The first generation Expedition was rated as a Low Emission Vehicle (LEV). The latter engine combined with the heavy-duty trailer towing package and appropriate axle ratio can achieve a towing capacity of 8,100 lbs (3,674 kg).
POWERTRAIN
Section::::Powertrain.
! rowspan="2" Engine name
! rowspan="2" Configuration
! rowspan="2" Model Year
! colspan="2" Output
! rowspan="2" Transmission
! Power
! Torque
4-speed E4OD automatic (1997-1998)
4-speed 4R100 automatic (1998-2002)
Transfer case (4x4):
2-speed BorgWarner 4406
High-range: 1:1
Low-range: 2.64:1
SAFETY AND SECURITY
Section::::Safety and security.
A two air bag supplementary restraint system (SRS) with 2-way occupant protection was standard. The air bags would adjust deployment force depending on crash severity. Features included SecuriLock with smart key and engine immobilizer, security approach lamps, four-wheel anti-lock braking system (ABS), side-intrusion door beams, post-crash fuel pump shut-off and three-point safety belts for all rows of seating with tension and locking retractors.
An optional four air bag SRS with 4-way occupant protection was available for the 2000–2002 model years. This included seat-mounted side torso side air bags.
The 2001 model introduced a BeltMinder system to detect when the driver did not have their safety belt secured.
!colspan=4 NHTSA NCAP crash scores:
!colspan=2  1997–2000
!colspan=2  2001–2002
MODEL YEAR CHANGES
1998
Section::::Model year changes.
Section::::1998.
No major cosmetic or mechanical changes. A new exterior color was added: Wedgewood Blue. Limited availability for 4.6 Windsor versus Romeo engine. This limited run was available only for Ultimate Tow Package
1999
Section::::1999.
The 1999 model year received a facelift similar to that of the 1999 model year Ford F-150. Included in the update was a new front grille which now dropped lower in the center, grille work, as well as a new front bumper that incorporated the fog lamps into the lower valance and larger center air intake. Both the 4.6 liter and 5.4 liter V8 engines received updates including more power and torque. The Two High mode for automatic full-time ControlTrac four-wheel drive equipped models was dropped leaving only Auto, Four High (lock) and Four Low (lock) modes. The dashboard also received an updated radio and air conditioning controls and revised Gauge Cluster and a Digital Odometer for the first time.
2000
Section::::2000.
Available features on 2000 models included a hidden radio antenna (integrated into the rear quarter panel window glass), Gentex auto dimming electrochromatic rearview mirrors, lane departure indicators on side view mirrors (before on the glass) and ultrasonic rear park assist /backup sensors. The lower front bumper valance and illuminated running boards were changed over to Arizona beige to complement the standard Arizona beige exterior body trim on Eddie Bauer models. Estate Green Clearcoat Metallic replaces Spruce Green Clearcoat Metallic, and Arizona Beige Metallic replaces Harvest Gold Clearcoat Metallic in the color palette.
2001
Section::::2001.
New trim packages included the XLT model. XLT versions could be optioned with the XLT No Boundaries package that included monochromatic black paint work with chrome grille and special alloy wheels. Eddie Bauer versions could be optioned with the Eddie Bauer Premier package that included either monochromatic Arizona beige or solid black paint work with painted alloy wheels and upgraded leather seating.
2002
Section::::2002.
No major cosmetic or mechanical changes. Last year model for the UN93. This was also the last model year for XLT No Boundaries and Eddie Bauer Premier trims.
SECOND GENERATION (2003–2006)
Section::::Second generation (2003–2006).
The redesigned second-generation Expedition was developed under the U222 program code name from 1996 to 2002, under Ford chief vehicle engineer Steve von Foerster and chief program engineer John Krafcik from 1998 to 2002. Design work began in 1997, with a proposal by Tyler Blake being chosen by management and frozen for production in 1999. UN93-body mules were spotted testing in 2000, with full prototypes running from late 2000. The new Expedition was unveiled at the 2002 North American International Auto Show, in January. It was launched in May 2002 for the 2003 model year and featured a new four-wheel independent long-travel suspension system, becoming the first full-size sport utility vehicle to use a fully independent suspension.
The new independent rear suspension (IRS) was perceived as being controversial by some at the time of its introduction. A misconception was that the Expedition's towing and off-road capabilities would be reduced, in comparison to the previous generation's rear live axle. Nevertheless, underbody obstacle clearance improved by half an inch, and up to two inches under the axle differentials. The new suspension reduces rear unsprung mass by 110 pounds, and allows for a full 9.4 inches of suspension travel (how much the wheels can travel up or down) improving its ability to traverse uneven terrain for improved control and ride quality. The four-wheel independent long-travel suspension itself is a purpose-built version of race suspensions found on off-road desert race vehicles.
Towing capacity increased by 800 lbs (363 kg) for a high towing capacity of 8,900 lbs (4,037 kg) when properly equipped with the appropriate axle ratio and heavy-duty trailer towing package. Payload capacity was increased up to 1,614 lbs (732 kg). Expedition also gained a hydroformed fully boxed frame providing a 70 percent improvement in torsional stiffness.
Along with the high towing capability came all-new steering, braking and electronic systems to help the Expedition better control and maneuver long heavy trailers. Adaptive variable assist power rack-and-pinion steering was introduced along with the largest brake rotors in the segment at that time (13.5 inches up front, 13 inches in back) with brake calipers 100 percent stiffer than the previous generation Expedition. The four-speed 4R70W automatic transmission received all-new control software to allow the transmission to automatically adjust to the demands of towing, using new computer logic that recognizes changes in load and road conditions.
The automatic full-time ControlTrac four-wheel drive system remained available, with an uprated two-speed dual range BorgWarner 4416 transfer case. The new transfer case featured an updated intelligent locking center multi-disc differential with front-to-rear "torque biasing" capability in Auto mode. A new dedicated microprocessor with new control software was added allowing the system to detect different terrain and surface conditions to predict traction loss before it happens. Two High mode was also reintroduced. Four-wheel electronic traction control was now available as an option, and simulated front and rear differential locks.
The V8 engines offered on the previous generation were carried over, but not without major changes and improvements. Both the 4.6 and 5.4-liter Triton V8 engines received further refinements in design and overall efficiency. Expedition qualified as an Ultra Low Emission Vehicle (ULEV) and was certified under the Environmental Protection Agency Tier 2 regulations one year earlier than required. The 4.6-liter engine received an all-new redesigned cast aluminium engine block optimized for weight reduction and NVH improvements. The 5.4-liter engine received an all-new redesigned cast-iron engine block with computer designed ribbing and bracing, along with thicker side skirts and reinforcement at the oil pan flange. The new engine block helped reduce engine vibration and unwanted noise while providing refined performance.
Both engines featured piston skirts coated with a teflon-based friction-reducing material, and fitted with low-tension, low oil consumption rings. In addition, a new fail-safe cooling mode provided protection even in the case of a catastrophic coolant loss (such as a punctured radiator). In the event of coolant loss, the engine control unit shuts off fuel to alternate cylinders to reduce the risk of engine damage from overheating. The valves continue to operate, in order to pump cooling air through the cylinders. The cooling system was designed to maintain an ideal engine temperature even when subjected to a prolonged 15 percent gradient in 46 °C (115 °F) weather. A returnless fuel supply system helped to reduce evaporative emissions by providing consistent pressure to the fuel injectors through a high-pressure pump.
New active hydraulic engine mounts were introduced to prevent the powertrain from inducing vibrations into the chassis. By optimizing these engine mounts, the engine block can act as a mass damper, absorbing chassis resonance, improving ride comfort.
Expedition's passenger cabin was better sealed than before, in an effort to eliminate intrusive outside noise from reaching the occupants. Wind, powertrain, road and vehicle body noise was reduced by improving interior acoustics through new damping materials, a total of 10 shear-style isolating body mounts, heavier sealing of body and panels, redesigned rubber door seals, and extensive use of interior structural acoustic foam in the upper B-pillars, upper and lower D-pillars and floor pan. Road noise was reduced by 2 decibels, body air leakage reduced by 56 percent, chances for sealant noise disturbances reduced from 15 percent to less than 0.5 percent and wind noise measured at was reduced from 35 sones to a world class level of 29 sones.
The Expedition also received a thorough exterior and interior cosmetic redesign. Expedition featured an all-new front fascia, grille work, headlamps, body trim, rear fascia, tail lamps and liftgate. Interior fit and finish were improved with an all-new interior featuring new dash, door panels, genuine aluminium trim, and plush carpeting. Premium perforated leather seating surfaces were standard on Expedition Eddie Bauer (optional on Expedition XLT). Expedition FX4 models featured all of Expedition's optional off-road equipment as standard equipment. Expedition's drag coefficient was 0.41 Cd.
Three-row seating was standard with all-new manual fold-flat stow away third row seats. No longer did owners have to remove the third rows seats for more storage. The third row could simply "disappear" into the floor. Power assisted PowerFold fold-flat third row seating was available as an optional extra. Available features included in-dash CD-ROM based navigation system, DVD based rear entertainment system, ultrasonic rear park assist/back up sensors, power moon roof, power adjustable accelerator and brake pedals (introduced on the first generation Expedition), Gentex auto dimming electrochromatic rear view mirror, lane departure indicators on side-view mirrors, second-row captain's chair luxury seating, premium audiophile sound system with in-dash six-disc CD changer and rear subwoofer and four-wheel independent pneumatic air-ride suspension system.
ENGINE(S)
Section::::Engine(s).
! Model year
! Type/model
! Power
! Torque
TRANSMISSION(S)
Section::::Transmission(s).
! Model Year
! Type/model
SAFETY AND SECURITY
Section::::Safety and security.
Like the generation before, a 2 air bag supplementary restraint system (SRS) with 2-way occupant protection was standard on Expedition. The dual front SRS air bags now included the Personal Safety System (PSS). PSS would tailor air bag deployment for driver and first passenger and included occupant classification, seat position, crash severity, safety belt pretensioner, load-limiting retractor and safety belt buckle usage sensors.
A new optional 4 air bag supplementary restraint system (SRS) with 6-way occupant protection was also available. This new air bag system included SafetyCanopy dual side curtain air bags for head, upper torso and rollover protection. SafetyCanopy would deploy along the A, B and C-pillars down to the vehicle's beltline. SafetyCanopy could remain inflated after deployment for extended protection and replaced the dual front side airbags featured on the first-generation Expedition.
Other features included side-intrusion door beams, security approach lamps, SecuriLock with smart key and engine immobilizer, BeltMinder, three-point safety belts for all rows of seating, post-crash fuel pump shut-off, tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS) and four-wheel, four-sensor, four-channel anti-lock braking system (ABS) with electronic brakeforce distribution (EBD) and emergency brake assist (EBA). AdvanceTrac electronic stability control with traction control system was introduced as an optional extra. The electronic traction and stability mitigation system would expand to include roll stability control (RSC) for the 2005 model year.
!colspan=4 NHTSA NCAP crash scores:
!colspan=2  MY2003–2005
!colspan=2  MY2006
MODEL YEAR CHANGES
2003
Section::::Model year changes.
Section::::2003.
Before the 2003 model year ended, Ford updated the running boards on Expeditions equipped with the Eddie Bauer trim. Earlier in the model year, Eddie Bauer models had received standard black running boards. Toward the end of the model year, Arizona beige running boards were re-introduced to complement the Arizona beige body work which came standard on Eddie Bauer. Body colored running boards had previously been offered on the first-generation Expedition from 2000 to 2002.
2004
Section::::2004.
No major cosmetic or mechanical changes. The Expedition Eddie Bauer Premier model is reintroduced after being absent from the 2003 model trim line-up. Monochromatic paint work with blacked-out headlamps and special alloy wheels were standard on Eddie Bauer Premier versions. A new Expedition XLT Sport model is added with Dark Shadow grey exterior body trim. The FX4 trim level was renamed NBX.
2005
Section::::2005.
Expedition received new roof rails which replaced the traditional sliding cross-bar roof racks. A new high end Limited trim level replaced the Eddie Bauer Premier model (though the regular Eddie Bauer was still available) and featured chrome accented roof rails, chrome-clad aluminium wheels, PowerFold power assisted stowable side view mirrors and chrome tipped exhaust. An upper high end King Ranch trim level with Castano leather seating was also introduced. The base 4.6 liter Triton V8 engine was dropped for the 2005 model year as the 5.4-liter Triton V8 was made standard on all Expeditions and updated with 24-valve technology and variable valve timing. Along with the 2005 model V8 engine update, the Expedition also received a significantly updated version of the four-speed 4R70W automatic transmission.
The new four-speed automatic transmission, now called 4R75E, featured fully electronic Smart Shift technology. A turbine speed sensor improved transmission control and provided the basis for the fully electronic shift scheduling. The transmission's microprocessor speeds were improved for better responsiveness and precision of the control system. The transmission was continuously learning, and would calculate the torque in the next gear and schedule shift points based on the Expedition's projected performance in the next gear. For 2005 model Expeditions the 4R75E transmission is designated by the letter "B" on the manufacturers safety compliance certification label, located in the driver's-side doorjamb. For 2006 model Expeditions, the 4R75E transmission is designated by the letter "Q".
2006
Section::::2006.
No major cosmetic or mechanical changes. Last year model for the U222. The Gentex auto dimming rear view mirrors were updated. Two new exterior colors were added later on within the model year. They were Pewter metallic and Dark Copper metallic. Medium Flint grey interior was also added to Limited models later on within the model year. Chrome tipped exhaust was made standard on King Ranch models. 2006 would be the last year model for the NBX trim. The ultrasonic rear park assist and SafetyCanopy side curtain airbags were offered as standalone options. Adjustable headrests were also added to the front seats to replace the one piece units.
RUSSIAN МОСКВА-ЧУКОТКА (MOSCOW-CHUKOTKA) OVERLAND EXPEDITION
Section::::Russian Москва-Чукотка (Moscow-Chukotka) overland expedition.
On April 12, 2006, three second-generation full-size Ford Expedition Eddie Bauer vehicles completed a 32-day overland expedition. This was a trip across North Asia and the Arctic Tundra. Six team members consisted of leaders, Alexey Mikhailov and Alexander Borodin, technical director, Andrey Rodionov, and professional off-road drivers,: Sergey Goryachev, Victor Parshikov, and Alexey Simakin. The route took them on permafrost and crossed the Arctic Circle twice. Visited landmarks included where American aviator Carl Ben Eielson was lost, and the birthplace of Russian explorer Semyon Dezhnev. The northernmost point on the route was latitude 69°42′ North (Pevek). The easternmost point visited was longitude 169°40′ West (Cape Dezhnev). Temperatures reached -36 °C (-32 °F) and the team encountered whiteouts and a polar cyclone. An estimated 200 kg (440 lbs) of snow was removed from each of the vehicles on the following day.
The vehicles were modified with front end guards along with front and rear utility bumpers, winches, safari roof racks, high-powered off-road lights and extra underbody plating for the engines. Two of the vehicles towed a dual axle utility trailer. Two were equipped also with caterpillar track systems supplied by Mattracks. The rubber track systems were only used when off-road conditions became too demanding for conventional tires. The rear stabilizer bar failed on both vehicles fitted with the Mattracks system. The vehicles were also equipped with gas stoves (to prepare food) and high-capacity auxiliary fuel tanks (mounted in the rear cargo bay) and sometimes run on poor-quality gasoline.
THIRD GENERATION (2007–2017)
Section::::Third generation (2007–2017).
The 2007 introduced the third generation of the Expedition developed under the U324 program code name which was an updated version of the second generation Expedition. Most of the improvements were mechanical in nature, and included a sheet metal refresh and redesigned interior with upgraded materials A new long wheelbase Expedition EL in (U.S. only) and called the Expedition Max (in Canada and Mexico only) as a replacement for the discontinued Ford Excursion.
High-strength hydroformed fully boxed Ford T platform (chassis) was a modified version of the half-ton Ford P2 platform from the Ford F-150. The new T1 platform replaced the old U platform, and provides 10 percent more torsional rigidity than the U platform. T1 incorporates a four-wheel independent long-travel suspension system (first introduced on the second generation) with redesigned suspension geometry and an all-new five-link rear suspension with new rear lower control-arms. As with previous model years, the suspension system could be had with adaptive pneumatic air-ride springs.
Ford's new 6-speed 6R75 intelligent automatic transmission with dual overdrive gears was introduced. The transmission featured push-button overdrive lock-out, electronic shift scheduling, adaptive shift algorithms and a mechatronic transmission control module (TCM) that would save adaptive shift data in keep alive memory (KAM). This safeguarded against complete data loss in case of a power failure (such as disconnecting the battery). In the event of a power failure, the mechatronic unit would simply read the last saved data entry from the system's memory, thus, the transmission did not have to completely relearn the owner's driving style.
Additionally, the Expedition is powered by the same 5.4 liter Triton V-8 internal combustion engine, rated at and 365 lbf·ft (495 N·m) of torque from the previous generation. When properly equipped with the heavy-duty trailer towing package the SUV can tow up to 9,200 lbs (4,130 kg). Expedition is classed under the Tier 2, Bin 5 / ULEV 2 Ultra Low Emission Vehicle environmental classification.
Off-road geometry figures for approach, departure and ramp breakover angles are 22°, 21° and 18° respectively. Minimum running (lowest point) ground clearance is . Underbody (overall) ground clearance is 9.1 inches (230 mm).
Selectable automatic full-time Control Trac four-wheel drive continues to be offered, and uses a two-speed dual range BorgWarner 4417 transfer case with intelligent locking center multi-disc differential and "torque biasing" capability. Four-wheel electronic traction control is standard and off-road underbody skid plate armor is optional. A new default off-road program with throttle response recalibration was added, and is automatically activated when Four Low (lock) mode is selected. Expedition can achieve an off-road crawl ratio of 41.06:1 with a low range ratio of 2.64:1 and rear axle ratio of 3.73:1.
The SUV also underwent a nip/tuck with a few cosmetic enhancements, both inside and out. Expedition's front end now featured Ford's signature three "hollow-bar" grille to complement the SUV's truck close relation to the F-150 and Super Duty pickups. New complex stepped style multifaceted headlamps, side view mirrors with updated LED lane departure indicators, sleeker body work and redesigned tail lamps were also added. The interior received a new dash with F-150-like center stack, center console, redesigned first row captains chair luxury seating, door panels and interior trim.
To further reduce outside noise intrusion for quieter, more isolated ride comfort, new SoundScreen laminated acoustic and solar tinted windshield was added with thicker laminated side window glass.
The new SUV was unveiled at the Houston Auto Show rather than at the North American International Auto Show, the Greater Los Angeles Auto Show, or the New York International Auto Show where most new models are, as 20 percent of all Expedition sales are in Texas. The third generation Expedition went on sale in August 2006. The first 2007 Expedition to roll off a Ford assembly line was donated by Ford to the Peter family of Jamaica, Queens, New York as part of an episode of the American Broadcasting Company series that aired May 7, 2006.
In late 2014, the third generation standard wheelbase U324 Expedition and long-wheelbase U354 Expedition EL/Max underwent a cosmetic and mechanical refresh for the 2015 model year.
ENGINE(S)
Section::::Engine(s).
! Model Year
! Type/model
! Power
! Torque
TRANSMISSION(S)
Section::::Transmission(s).
! Model Year
! Type/model
FEATURES
Section::::Features.
Standard features include 6 speed Automatic transmission, 3.5L EcoBoost V6 gasoline engine with Ti-VCT, and 2 wheel drive using the rear wheels.
Available features include: Extended-Length version, 4 wheel drive, Premium Audiophile sound system with in dash six-disc CD changer, rear subwoofer, MP3 device and iPod connectivity, SIRIUS XM satellite radio, HomeLink wireless control system, tri zone automatic climate control for driver, first passenger and rear passengers, PowerFold power stow away side-view mirrors, PowerFold power fold flat third-row seating, Gentex auto-dimming rear view mirror, adaptive pneumatic suspension system, power adjustable pedals, ultrasonic park assist, perforated leather seating, climate-controlled heated and cooled front captain's chairs with 10-way power adjust and memory, second-row captain's chair luxury seating, DVD-based voice activated navigation system with liquid crystal touch display, power moon roof, slimline rear DVD-based entertainment system with flip down LCD screen, power-assisted liftgate and 20-inch chrome-clad aluminium six-spoke wheels with Pirelli Scorpion all-season tires. Some of these features are available on Expedition XLT; many of them are included on Expedition Eddie Bauer and Expedition Limited.
Upgraded perforated leather seating, wood and leather-wrapped steering wheel with audio, climate and cruise controls, interior ebony wood trim, stylized blacked-out stepped-style multifaceted headlamps and monochromatic paint finish with body-colored grille and chrome accenting are standard on the Limited.
MODEL YEAR CHANGES
2008
Section::::Model year changes.
Section::::2008.
For the 2008 model year, power deployable/retractable running boards became available, along with a rear view backup camera system. The camera, which is mounted under the Expedition's center liftgate appliqué, utilizes the Gentex auto dimming rear view mirror's picture-in-mirror technology to display what it sees. Expedition King Ranch was also reintroduced after being absent from the 2007 model year trim line-up. Expedition XLT models now get body colored lower body work, replacing the previous black plastic trim and was the Last Ford Model Year for the nine-passenger Front Bench seating option in the Ford Full-Size SUV's from Ford Motor Company (Ford discontinued the 9-passenger Front Bench Seating Option for 2009 and Forward on the old Ford Full-Size SUVs 2009–present)
2009
Section::::2009.
In July 2008, Ford's Wayne, Michigan plant started production of the 2009 models until finishing the plants run in December of that same year. In January 2009 production of the Expedition was relocated to the Kentucky Truck Assembly in Louisville along with its sister SUV, the Lincoln Navigator, and the Ford F-Series Super Duty. That plant used to build the Ford Excursion until 2005.
Expedition's 6-speed 6R75 automatic was replaced by an improved version, the 6-speed 6R80 automatic. 6R80 features more robust internals, new software logic and a tow/haul mode (replaces the overdrive lock-out) that utilizes new uphill/downhill gradient shift logic for improved performance while towing or hauling heavy loads. The 6-speed automatic can compensate for altitude, grade/slope and present load conditions. The system also reduces the transmission's tendency to "hunt" for the right gear(s) and provides engine braking when descending hills. The nine-passenger front bench seating option has been discontinued for the 2009 model year, leaving only the eight-passenger seating option left with two front bucket seats and two rear bench seats. and the chrome "Expedition" name plate badges have been removed from the left and right front doors. The chrome "Expedition" name plate badge on the rear liftgate remains.
Additional features included the now standard FlexFuel capability, which can take gasoline, E85 (85% ethanol/15% gasoline), or any combination of the two, and the newly installed EasyFuel capless fuel-filler system. The 5.4 liter V8/FlexFuel feature also upgraded its power to , while the torque rating stayed the same at . The 2009 model year also boosted its maximum towing capacity to for the 4x2 version, and up to for the 4x4 version.
The new entertainment features added to the 2009 model year included the optional Ford SYNC, and an all-new DVD-based voice-activated, multi-entertainment/navigational system with liquid crystal touch display. The rearview camera system is now integrated to show the video feed through the navigation screen instead for the rearview mirror, however, the rearview mirror is still used to show images on Expeditions not equipped with the navigation system. The new navigation system features up to 10 gigabytes of storage space for more than 2400 songs, a jukebox function, a screened photo display, iPod/Zune capability for downloading and recharging, ripping CDs, and integrated compatibility for cellphones and Bluetooth; the newly compatible Sirius Travel Link, which allow drivers to access traffic, weather, sports, and local movie listings; and a "Route Guidance" mode for road and street information. The steering wheel also has a tilt feature and radio controls, including Ford SYNC buttons, allowing the driver to press the button and use voice commands to activate the system, which became standard on Eddie Bauer, Limited, and King Ranch. The tilt w/radio control feature was optional on the XLT during its Wayne plant built orders, but after production moved to Louisville it became standard. For accessory purposes, a HD radio can be installed upon request at a Ford dealership in the United States. New for 2009 were standard heated second row outboard seats on the Limited and King Ranch models only with either the second row bench seat or the optional bucket seats.
2010
Section::::2010.
No major cosmetic or mechanical changes. For the 2010 model year optional packages have now been renamed (to Rapid Specificated Order Codes) and upgraded (100s for XLT, 200s for Eddie Bauer, 300s for Limited, 400s for King Ranch) for the newer models. It has also announced that the 2010 models will now feature Ford's MyKey and trailer sway control as a standard on all trims. The 2010 models were ranked 6th among the top 11 affordable large size SUVs in "US News & World Report. A diesel version for the 2010 model year did not get past the planning stage. Rain-sensing windshield wipers were added as an optional extra for Eddie Bauer, but standard on the Limited and King Ranch versions.
2011
Section::::2011.
No major cosmetic or mechanical changes. HD Radio became a standard on all trims, and a dual DVD system that placed at the headrest area became an optional feature. Another change that was made was in the entry-level trim department, with the Expedition offering the newly designated standard XL entry level with lower black cladding, while the XLT level trim was upgraded along with a new XLT Premium trim with gold cladding, replacing the Eddie Bauer level trim. Also, silver cladding was added as an exterior trim as part of a newly optional XLT Premium Sport Appearance Package. Both Limited and King Ranch trims receive new paint and interior trim. The limited trim also has a chrome grille for a change.
2012
Section::::2012.
No major cosmetic or mechanical changes. The second heated row seating option was added to XLT Premium and the front park assists became a standard feature on the Limited and King Ranch trims.
2013
Section::::2013.
No major cosmetic changes; however the XL trim and XLT Sport options were dropped, leaving only the XLT, XLT Premium, Limited, and King Ranch trims. Updates made to the 2013 models (which went on sale in August 2012) included the TowCommand trailer brake controller system that is bundled with the heavy-duty trailer towing package, a new internal shift control module which allows the six-speed automatic transmission to tailor shifts to engine demand, 10 equipment levels, three new colors (Blue Jeans Metallic, Kodiak Brown Metallic and Ruby Red Metallic Tinted Clearcoat), and a new 20-inch chrome-clad aluminum wheels that was available on both the Limited and King Ranch trims. The latter trim also featured chrome roof racks and side mirrors. Another notable change can be found on the driver's instrumental panel, with the temperature and fuel gauge trading sides.
2014
Section::::2014.
No major cosmetic changes. Only three trims, XLT, Limited and King Ranch are offered. The Sirius XM with Navlink and HD radio is added to the XLT as an optional feature. A new, quieter, mechanical Nivomat adaptive hydraulic load-leveling suspension system is available, in place of the adaptive pneumatic air-ride load-leveling suspension. When properly equipped the Expedition continues to offer top-end towing capability with a braked trailer towing capacity of 9,200 lbs (4,173 kg or 4.6 tons).
2015
Section::::2015.
On February 18, 2014, Ford introduced a mid-cycle refresh of the Expedition (U324) and Expedition EL (U354), dubbed the U3242 and U3542 respectively, for the 2015 model year. The "2" signifying the second phase of the U324 and U354. The debut was at the Dallas-Fort Worth Auto Show on February 19, 2014; because Texas (especially Dallas and Houston) is an important market. Despite a 27% drop in sales since 2008, Ford is committed to continuing producing the Expeditions. Ford started production on the updated Expedition (and Expedition EL, which will continue to compete with the Suburban and Yukon XL) around the first quarter of 2014 and placed the 2015 models in dealerships in July 2014. Ford announced that the three level trims, XLT, Limited, and King Ranch, will continue to be offered along with a new top of the line Platinum trim. On September 12, 2013, (which was the same day that GM unveiled their next generation SUVs), Automobile Magazine posted a spy shot of the 2015 Expedition, which showed a repositioned tailpipe, and a more upright front fascia which bore a taller, wider grille that appeared inspired by the F-150 and Ford F-Series Super Duty trucks.
Official photos released on February 18, 2014 revealed an all-new aggressive armadillo-like three-bar grille, which features step-stacked bars that evoke the appearance of stepped armor-plating on an armadillo's back. All-new thinner headlamps were added, in addition to an all-new front bumper with oversized lower air intake. The new bumper also features a lower chrome bar and twin LED fog lamps that flank the chrome bar. Brightwork was added on the rear liftgate; and the tailpipe was repositioned straight, instead of making a 90 degree turn behind the right rear wheel.
Expedition remained a body-on-frame (BOF), allowing the SUV to retain its heavy-duty truck underpinnings for towing and hauling needs. The full-size SUV received the 3.5 liter 24-valve DOHC Ti-VCT EcoBoost V-6 engine which features an aluminium engine block, twin-turbochargers, direct injection, and twin independent variable camshaft timing. Power output for the EcoBoost V-6 will be rated around 365 horsepower and 420 lb-ft of torque, and will be the only engine featured, dropping the 5.4 liter V-8 that was available in the 2007–2014 models due to Ford wanting to make the Expedition more fuel efficient. Despite the changeover from V-8 to V-6, the Expedition did boost its MPG to 16 (city)/23 (highway) for the 2WD and 15 (city)/21 (highway) for the 4WD, but it is now on par with the GM large-size SUVs, which also boasts the same MPGs as the Expedition. In addition to the new engine, Expedition received an updated 6-speed 6R80 SelectShift intelligent manumatic gearbox with manual shift mode. Expedition also features a new electric power servo-assisted steering and Pull-Drift Compensation (PDC) which detects crosswinds and compensates for it.
The interior remained similar to the outgoing models, but with upgraded materials and a revised prominent center stack, which introduces the latest version of the 8-inch MyFord Touch touchscreen infotainment and telematics system. Push-to-start engine ignition with intelligent access was added and the four-wheel drive mode selector (for models with 4x4) was revised and repositioned. The TowCommand paddle controls was repositioned over the four-wheel drive mode selector, to make way for revised audio and climate controls on the center stack.
The new features for 2015 included an optional, revised four-wheel independent suspension system with intelligent continuously-controlled damping (CCD) system that alters suspension settings constantly based on 46 parameters and offers comfort, normal, and sport modes. Expedition is the first Ford vehicle in North America to have continuously-controlled damping. Other new optional features includes blind-spot information system (BLIS) with cross-traffic alert, and a rearview camera and apps for the infotainment system to help with towing and off-road driving, all of which is standard in the Platinum trim, whose seating and interior features include Brunello leather, a red wine color with tuxedo-stripe accents and French seamed stitching, or black leather with Agate Gray accents.
The selectable automatic full-time ControlTrac four-wheel drive system continues to be offered, but gains a trio of new off-road electronic systems in the form of Hill Ascent Assist (HAA), Hill Descent Control (HDC), and Ford Truck Apps (FTA). FTA gives off-road orientation/geometry, 4x4 system status, and traction control system status in real-time. The four-wheel electronic traction control system (brake differential locking control) was recalibrated to take into account the new EcoBoost V-6's higher torque output and earlier torque delivery.
EcoBoost Performance
The heavyweight 6,155 lb (3+ ton) as tested, 2015 Expedition Platinum with 3.5 EcoBoost V-6 and selectable automatic full-time ControlTrac four-wheel drive was clocked from 0 to 60 mph in 6.4 seconds. The full-size SUV can clip 100 mph in 18.2 seconds, 110 mph in 24.3 seconds, and is electronically safety-limited to 113 mph. Expedition has a near perfect 50:50 front:rear balanced weight distribution and center of gravity positioned at 28.5 inches.
Expedition Platinum averaged 39.2 mph in a 610 ft slalom run and pulled 0.78g in roadholding skidpad testing. High speed emergency braking from 70 mph to 0 (full stop) was completed in 170 ft. In comparison, the Expedition's main rival took a full 10 feet longer, completing the same emergency brake test in 180 ft.
2016
Section::::2016.
For the 2016 model year, most of the features that were introduced from 2015 were carried over. However, the Expedition began adding Ford's upgraded enhanced SYNC3 to its trims, as an optional feature on the XLT and standard on Limited, King Ranch and Platinum. The Limited added Sony's Premium Audio System as a standard.
2017
Section::::2017.
In June 2016, Ford began selling the 2017 model year Expedition, with no major changes being made and continued to be offered in XLT, Limited, King Ranch, and Platinum level trims. This is the final year of the third generation Expedition and Expedition EL (U324) and (U354)
FOURTH GENERATION (2018–PRESENT)
Section::::Fourth generation (2018–present).
The fourth-generation Expedition, known internally at Ford Motor Company as the "U553", was unveiled on February 7, 2017 at the Dallas Cowboys training facility, Ford Center in Frisco, Texas, ahead of its Chicago Auto Show debut. Production of the new Expedition started on September 25, 2017. The vehicles arrived at dealerships in November 2017.
The all-new Expedition was developed in secret under the U553 program codename and features body-on-frame (BOF) architecture with high-strength lightweight material construction consisting of boron steel and aluminium. The four-door body is constructed from alumimium-alloy, while the frame is constructed from boron steel. The U553 will move to the all-new half-ton hydroformed T3 platform (chassis), which is a modified version of the half-ton platform underpinning the P552 2015 Ford F-150. The T3 platform will use a new four-wheel independent suspension system design. Updated powertrain systems (engines and transmissions) including a Hybrid variant with proprietary parallel hybrid electric-drive system to help increase fuel efficiency are expected. Expedition will gain Ford's new 10-speed 10R80 SelectShift automatic transmission which will feature artificially intelligent shifting, electronic range select, manual shift mode, and be controlled via a rotary dial on the center console. The next-generation Expedition's chief engineer is Jackie Marshall DiMarco, who is also the chief engineer for the next-generation F-150 pickup.
Spy photographers captured early, engineering test mules of the U553 in late 2015, which sported a crude highly modified non-production intent F-150 SuperCrew body atop the production intent T3 platform chassis. In late 2016, spy photographers managed to capture photos of the actual first pre-production prototypes of the U553, wearing the production intent body on the production intent platform. The styling and appearance of the U553 Expedition is inspired by the U502 Explorer along with elements of the P552 F-150, the vehicle on which the new Expedition is based, and will have a more aerodynamic and streamlined silhouette, with raked windshield and sloped roofline which will lead to a rear liftgate spoiler. The U553 Expedition's C-pillar will be more forward slanted, echoing the forward slanted C-pillar of the U502 Explorer introduced for 2011. In addition the Expedition's body will feature sculpted sides with character lines, similar to the U502 Explorer, as opposed to the straight slab sides of the current Expedition. Expedition's front grill and headlamp design is inspired by the facelifted P552 F-150, with the front bumper retaining a similar design and appearance to its predecessor, the U324 Expedition, after its facelift. It also expanded the standard size version's wheelbase by 3 inches and its length by 4 inches while decreasing the height by one inch (losing 300 pounds in the process) in order to allow more leg room and space.
Expedition (U553) will be one of the very first vehicles in North America to use a new next-generation high speed Controller Area Network 3 (CAN-3) vehicle data bus system. The CAN-3 electrical architecture is akin to a human nervous system and allows the Expedition's various on-board microprocessors and electronic vehicle control systems to communicate or "talk" to one another through electronic data that is sent and received. With high speed CAN-3, Expedition can learn and react faster than before.
The Expedition will be available with selectable automatic full-time four-wheel drive that routes torque through a two-speed dual range transfer case with electronic locking center multi-disc differential. A new electronic locking rear differential will be available to augment the 4x4 system. Both the center and rear locking systems will be teamed with four-wheel electronic traction control (ETC), which simulates a locking front differential by ABS "brake locking" the front differential. Expedition's off-road electronic aids Hill Descent Control (HDC) and Hill Ascent Assist (HAA) will be joined by the Terrain Management System adapted from the Ford Raptor. Terrain Management is capable of working with 4L mode, like the Ford Raptor, and has 7 (seven) drive modes to choose from which include Normal, Eco, Sport, Tow/Haul, Gravel/Snow, Mud/Ruts, and Sand. The four-wheel drive system has 3 (three) direct drive modes which include 2H, 4A, and 4L. The 4H mode has now been dropped from the selection, as the Terrain Management computer now controls the electronic center lock of the four-wheel drive system. Terrain Management will engage the electronic center lock for a 50:50 front:rear torque split while in 4A direct drive mode, when the Mud/Ruts or Sand modes are selected. The 4L direct drive mode engages the electronic center lock regardless of the off-road drive mode selected. A "tap to lock/unlock" button is located near the drive mode dial for operation of the electronic rear lock.
Off-road geometry figures for approach, departure, and ramp breakover, improve slightly with 23.3°, 21.9°, and 21.4° of obstacle clearance. Minimum running (lowest point) ground clearance increases by a full inch, from 8.7 to 9.8 inches.
Expedition (U553) is certified by the Society of Automotive Engineers' independent SAE J2807 towing standard to tow a maximum 9,300 lbs (4,218 kg or 4.65 tons) of braked trailer. The tow rating increases by 100 lbs over the previous generation and continues to be the highest tow rating among full-size SUVs. Expedition will also feature Pro Trailer Backup Assist, a semi-autonomous system that allows the Expedition to reverse itself with a trailer coupled. The driver directs the system via a control dial, while the Expedition handles all steering and limits reversing speed.
Among the new features that have been incorporated into the fourth generation Expedition includes a 360-degree camera and park assist system that can make parking much easier, along with optional safety features that will use both camera and radar technology, and include automatic braking, lane-keep assist, active cruise control, and blind-spot monitors. In addition, there are two USB ports per row, four 12-volt outlets and a 120-volt household outlet. Ford has also partnered up with Sling that enables the twin-screen rear entertainment system, as well as personal tablets on the vehicle's Wi-Fi, to watch cable TV content. The Wi-Fi content can be used up to 10 devices and features Apple Car Play and Android Auto capabilities that is compatible to Ford SYNC3 and Ford Pass. There is also at least 40 different spaces and cup holders to allow items to be stored. A dual vista panoramic sunroof is available as an optional feature.
The fourth generation Expedition will only be available in four level trims as the King Ranch trim (from 2005–2017) was discontinued after the 2017 model year. The three primary trims, XLT, Limited, and the top-of-the-line Platinum, will be available to regular customers, while the fourth trim, XL, will only be exclusive to rental companies, corporate fleets, and government agencies, as they will not have a lot of the features as the aforementioned three trims. The Expedition will still retain its unique (standard) eight passenger seating on all trims like before, with optional seven passenger seating. The MSRP has been listed by Ford for the fourth generation Expedition will be higher than the previous generation, starting at around $52,000 (US) for XLT and $63,000 (US) for Limited level trims.
SAFETY & SECURITY
Section::::Safety & Security.
All 2018 Expedition models carry a power four-wheel disk antilock brake system (ABS) with brake assist and Electronic Brakeforce Distribution (EBD), six standard airbags including a Safety Canopy System that provides side-curtain airbags with roll-fold technology and a rollover sensor, rear-door child-safety locks, a LATCH system (Lower Anchors and Tether Anchors for Children), an Individual Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS), and a SOS Post-Crash Alert System https://www.ford.com/suvs/expedition/models/expedition-xlt/.
The Expedition has an available Driver Assistance Package that equips the vehicle with smart driver-assist technology, including pre-collision assist with pedestrian detection and forward collision warning, lane-keeping assist, adaptive cruise control, auto high-beam headlamps, and rain-sensing wipers.
An array of standard security features includes a SecuriLock Passive Anti-Theft System, a perimeter alarm, a personal safety system, SecuriCode Keyless Entry Keypad, MyKey, and available inclination and intrusion sensors.
EXPEDITION SSV
Section::::Expedition SSV.
The 2018 Expedition SSV is a fleet-only version of the Expedition XLT, and offers similar standard equipment.
EXPEDITION XLT
Section::::Expedition XLT.
Starting off the 2018 Expedition lineup is the XLT trim, which is available in either 4X2 or 4X4 configurations, as well as in the MAX style. Standard features include cloth upholstery, keyless access with push-button start, eighteen-inch aluminum-alloy wheels, a 60/40 second-row bench seat with CenterSlide seat, Hill Start Assist and Hill Descent Control (4X4 models only), MyFord w/ SYNC radio with 4.3-inch LCD display screen, SiriusXM Satellite Radio, and a nine-speaker audio system, 3.5L EcoBoost Twin-Turbocharged V6 gasoline engine with 375-400 horsepower and 470-480 lb. ft. of torque, remote start, a power-folding third-row bench seat, and more.
A key difference from 2017 is that a surround-sound premium audio system and rear seat entertainment system are no longer available as an option for XLT models, and that push-button start, and a power-folding third-row seat are now standard equipment (this feature was optional on the 2017 XLT).
A trailer towing package, leather-trimmed seating surfaces, heated front and rear seats, SYNC 3 infotainment system with optional GPS navigation, a power panoramic moonroof, heated and ventilated front bucket seats, the FX4 Off-Road Package (4X4 models only), twenty-inch aluminum-alloy wheels, and other comfort and convenience features are optional.
EXPEDITION LIMITED
Section::::Expedition Limited.
The 2018 Expedition Limited is built with either a 4X2 or 4X4 build, each with a bigger MAX build. The Limited key features include in-vehicle wi-fi with available SYNC Connect, a hands-free foot-activated lift gate, and standard 20-inch ultra bright machined aluminum wheels with dark tarnish painted pockets. A 3.5 EcoBoost engine functions with a 10-speed SelectShift automatic transmission. The Limited also has a 23.3-gallon fuel tank. A heavy duty engine radiator and two-speed automatic four-wheel-drive with neutral towing capability are optional.
The Limited has the equivalent power and handling features of the XLT, though it comes with standard all-season tires. The standard power and handling features include a two-wheel rear-wheel drivetrain, multilink independent rear suspension, Electronic Power Assist (EPAS) rack and pinion steering, Advance Trac with stability control, which is designed to provide stability and traction by reducing the chance of spinning the drive wheel, trailer sway control, traction control, and a non-limited-slip 3.15 rear axle on the 4x2 model. A 4X4 Limited build and 4X2 MAX build has a standard 3.31 drive ratio, while a 4X4 MAX build has a 3.73 drive ratio.
A Terrain Management System and hill start assist and hill descent control is available for 4x4 models.
Optional features on the Limited include a Control Trac four-wheel-drive system, a non-limited-slip 3.31 rear axle or electronic limited-slip differential 3.72 rear axle, continuously controlled damping (CCD) suspension, and an integrated brake controller with the Heavy Duty Trailer Tow package.
Unlike the XLT model, the Limited has standard Dual Zone Electronic Automatic Temperature Control (DEATC), and rear auxiliary climate controls.
Standard entertainment features include a Harman 12-speaker B&O Play Audio System, a SYNC 3 Enhanced Voice Recognition Communications and Entertainment System, SYNC Connect and FordPass, SiriusXM Radio, and HD Radio.
The cabin has perforated, leather-trimmed, heated and ventilated bucket front seats, heated second-row outboard seats, second-row power folding tip and slide seats, power folding and reclining third-row seats, and third-row power-folding headrests. Second-row power folding tip and slide bucket seats are optional.
The Limited has six smart-charging multimedia USB ports, with two in each row, and a wireless charging hub on the center console. The cabin also features 15 cupholders, analog RPM and speed gauges with digital minor gauges, and an 8-inch center display.
Other standard interior features include a cargo management system and protector, power-adjustable brake and accelerator pedals, an auto-dimming rearview mirror, four 12-volt power points and a 110-volt / 150-watt AC power outlet, a rotary gear shift dial, woodgrain appliqués, and a heated, leather-wrapped power tilt/telescoping steering wheel with audio controls. The cabin has an illuminated entry system and ambient lighting, with map lights mounted over the front overhead console, dome lights on the second and third rows, and a rear cargo area light. Push-button start systems with intelligent access, a remote start system, and a Blind Spot Information System (BLIS) with cross-traffic alert and trailer tow monitoring are also standard.
Optional interior features include an advanced cargo manager, an enhanced active park assist system, a lane-keeping system, pre-collision assist with pedestrian detection, Pro Trailer Backup Assist, and adaptive cruise control.
Power-deployable running boards are standard on Expedition Limited, and Limited MAX. Each has a unique color with magnetic-painted polished stainless steel accents. Among the other exterior standard features are intermittent front and rear wipers, a windshield wiper de-icer, a rear window defroster and washer, halogen fog lamps, quad-beam reflector headlamps, a halogen projector-beam, incandescent tail-lamps, a hands-free foot-activated lift gate and manual liftglass, a Center High-Mounted Stop Lamp (CHMSL), configurable daytime running lamps, roof-rack side rails, a chrome grille with Magnetic painted accents, and a Class IV trailer hitch receiver. A capless fuel filler is also standard.
Rain sensing-front wipers, roof rail cross bars, LED lamps and headlamps, magnetic grille and mirror caps, and front tow hooks are optional.
The 2018 Expedition Limited has power adjustable heated mirrors with memory capability, security approach lamps, integrated blind spot mirrors, a solartinted windshield and front door windows, and second and third-row privacy glass, and lower bodyside cladding and wheel-lip moldings. A panoramic vista roof is optional.
The 2018 Expedition Limited has the standard safety features of all Expedition Trims with an additional optional 360-degree split-view camera. The standard features include a four-wheel anti-lock brake system, a rear view camera with backup assist, dual-stage front airbags, three-point safety belts, side-impact airbags, a safety canopy system that includes the third row, rear-door child-safety locks, LATCH (Lower Anchors and Tether Anchors for Children), Individual Tire Pressure Monitoring System (TPMS), and an SOS Post-Crash Alert System.
Security systems include SecuriLock passive anti-theft system, a remote keyless entry system, a perimeter alarm, a personal safety system, SecuriCode keyless entry keypad, MyKey, and inclination and intrusion sensors.
EXPEDITION PLATINUM
Section::::Expedition Platinum.
The flagship Ford Expedition Platinum will be more upscale and move further upmarket, with high-end interior fit-and-finish and luxury interior and exterior appointments. Interiors will feature handcrafted real wood trim, real metal accents, soft-touch materials, 12-speaker Bang & Olufsen luxury sound system, dual panel panoramic glass roof with power shade, soft premium diamond-quilted perforated leather climate-controlled and massaging seats with French seam stitchwork, soft leather wrapped dash, steering wheel, and door panels with single and double stitched ornamental stichwork. The Platinum's exterior will receive standard full LED headlamps vertically stacked in headlamp nacelles, LED turn signal lamps, LED daytime running lamps, LED fog lamps and diffused LED tail lamps with LED brake lamps. In addition, the exterior will feature "platinum" satin-finished lower front and rear bumper skid plates, roof rails, side mirror crowns, and liftgate accents, along with polished stainless steel power deployable-and-retractable running boards, polished alloy wheels, chrome brightwork, and platinum satin-finished mesh grillwork. Expedition Platinums will also feature a specific performance tuned version of the 3.5 liter EcoBoost V-6 with 400 horsepower and 480 lb-ft of torque mated to the 10-speed 10R80 SelectShift automatic transmission.
Both the Expedition and long-wheelbase Expedition MAX will be available with the Platinum treatment, and will be the most expensive level trim, with a MSRP of $73,900 (US) for standard and $76,000 (US) for the MAX version, with the 4WD option topping off on the latter at $79,000 (US).
EXPEDITION FX4
Section::::Expedition FX4.
On June 16, 2017, Ford announced that an off-road package Expedition FX4 will become available starting with the 2018 model year, with an announced MSRP at around $63,000 (US). This option, available to 4WD XLT level trims only and targeted towards the 20% of Expedition owners who use the vehicle for off-road purposes, is expected to compete with the Chevrolet Suburban and Tahoe Z71 package in both standard and MAX versions. Among the detailed features are patented electronic locking limited-slip rear differential, Off-road-tuned shocks, All-terrain tires, Seven different skid plates that serve as underbody armor and protect critical areas, Unique 18-inch Magnetic Metallic-painted cast-aluminum wheels, Chrome running boards, FX4 badging on the liftgate and front fender, and New rubber floor liners. According to Mike Kipley, the engineering manager for the Expedition, "The FX4 Off-Road package delivers off-road driving confidence," adding that "The technology we're using works to adapt to different driving conditions so customers can enjoy the adventure without worry."
ENGINE(S)
Section::::Engine(s).
The 2018 Expedition's die-cast aluminum 3.5L EcoBoost V6 engine operates with a twin-independent Variable Camshaft Timing (Ti-VCT) valvetrain, and a 10-speed automatic SelectShift transmission. The engine makes 375 horsepower and 470 lb.-ft. of torque at 5,000 rpm in XLT and Limited trims, and 400 horsepower 480 lb.-ft. of torque at 5,000 rpm in the Platinum trim. It's backed up by a gasoline direct injection fuel delivery system with a single, stainless steel exhaust. The drive ratio is 3.15 on a standard 4x2; 3.31 on standard 4x4 and 4x2 MAX; and 3.73 on a 4x4 MAX. The engine's compression ratio is 10:5:1.
! Model Year
! Type/model
! Power
! Torque
TRANSMISSION(S)
Section::::Transmission(s).
! Model Year
! Type/model
EXPEDITION EL/MAX
Section::::Expedition EL/Max.
As part of the shift to the T1 platform for the 2007 model year, Ford developed an extended-length version of the Expedition, to more closely match the Chevrolet Suburban/GMC Yukon in size. Introduced as the Ford Expedition EL (EL=extended length alongside the Lincoln Navigator L, the variant effectively replaced the Super Duty-based Ford Excursion. In Canada, to avoid confusion with the Acura EL sedan, Ford renamed the extended-length version as the Expedition Max.
Originally intended to carry the Ford Everest name, Ford product planners changed their minds, as the nameplate was already in use for a midsize Ford SUV in Asia. Outside North America, including the U.S. territories of Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin Islands, and Guam, the Expedition EL is also imported to and sold in the Middle East and Taiwan. In the Philippines, the Expedition EL is the only version imported and sold; coincidentally, it is also a market where the Ford Everest SUV is sold.
EXPEDITION EL/MAX (2007–2017)
Section::::Expedition EL/Max (2007–2017).
For the 2007 model year, Ford introduced the extended-length Expedition EL/Max. With a wheelbase stretched 12 inches (to 131 inches) and a length increased 14.8 inches (to 221.3 inches) over the standard Expedition, the EL/Max is sized comparably to the Suburban/Yukon XL, providing additional cargo space over the standard-wheelbase version. The extended-length body of the EL/Max is distinguished by its longer cargo-area windows and its rear door design (the rear wheels no longer intrude into the lower half of the doors).
Alongside the standard-length Ford Expedition, the EL/Max was offered with a single powertrain; the 5.4L Triton V8 was standard from 2007 to 2014, replaced by the twin-turbocharged 3.5L EcoBoost V6 for 2015 to 2017. The EL/Max is also sold with both rear-wheel and four-wheel drive configurations. The larger overall size restricted towing capacity by approximately 300 pounds, to (for 2WD) and (for 4WD) over a standard-wheelbase example.
Over its first-generation, the EL/Max shared its features with the standard-length Expedition; for 2012 model, a cargo organizer became an exclusive feature. The Expedition EL was introduced in 4 trim lines: XLT, Eddie Bauer, Limited, and the King Ranch series during the 2007–2010 model year. For 2011, the Eddie Bauer trim was replaced by XLT and XLT Premium, with XL becoming the new base trim level. After 2012, all versions of the XL trim were dropped.
For 2015, the EL/Max received the same facelift and upgrades as the standard-length Expedition.
Alongside the standard-length Expedition, the EL/Max also received a 5-star rating from the NHTSA. The Expedition EL was also ranked 9th among the top 15 "Best Family Haulers", according to a June 2009 consumers favorite survey conducted by Edmunds.
EXPEDITION MAX (2018–PRESENT)
Section::::Expedition MAX (2018–present).
On February 7, 2017, Ford announced that the Expedition EL will now take the name Expedition MAX (Max is now stylized with all capitals as MAX) nameplate as the rest of the world when the fourth generation models debut in November 2017 for the 2018 model year (in actuality, the MAX is a second generation SUV). Like the standard size Expedition, this was also unveiled ahead of the Chicago Auto Show and will carry the same features and the three featured trims, XLT, Limited, and Platinum. It also expanded its length size by one inch to allow more space and legroom in the third seat row. Although the rear passenger doors were widened, the aft wheel well trim still doesn't cut into them.
This version is expected to become more competitive with the Suburban/Yukon XL in the long wheelbase SUV segment, an area where GM dominates; when photos for the fourth generation Expedition were released, a majority of the pictures and videos indicated where Ford wants to target the MAX. Like the (standard length) Expedition, the (extended length) Expedition MAX will also still retain its (standard) eight passenger seating on all trims like before. The MAX will also see a starting MSRP range of $55,000 (US) for the XLT and $66,800 (US) for the Limited level trims, making this more expensive than the Suburban but on par with the Yukon XL in terms of pricing.
AVAILABILITY
FULL SIZE EXPEDITION
Section::::Availability.
Section::::Full Size Expedition.
The standard size Expedition are sold in the United States, Canada, Mexico, the U.S. territories of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, the CNMI, U.S. Virgin Islands, and Guam, Republic of China Taiwan, the Philippines, the Middle East, Central America, the Caribbean, South America (except Argentina, Brazil and Venezuela), Asia (Cambodia, Laos, Mongolia and South Korea), Africa (Algeria, Angola, Cape Verde, Egypt, Gabon, Ghana, Libya, Madagascar, Morocco, Nigeria and Senegal), and Central Asia (Armenia, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan).
After the 2015 refresh, the standard size Expedition became exclusive to the United States, Canada, Mexico, Republic of China (Taiwan), and the Middle East. The US and Canadian Expeditions are available in XLT, Limited, King Ranch and Platinum, while The Mexican Expedition offers the XLT, Limited, and King Ranch trims. The Middle East Expeditions are offered in XL, XLT, Limited, King Ranch, and in Platinum (RWD only) trims.
With the introduction of the fourth generation Expedition, Ford will make the SUV available to North America in the Fall of 2017 first, followed by a global launch in early 2018, where it will go on sale in selected countries.
EXPEDITION EL/MAX
Section::::Expedition EL/Max.
For the Expedition EL/Max, all six versions (XL, XLT/Eddie Bauer, XLT Platinum/Sport, Limited, King Ranch and Platinum) are available in the United States. From the 2007 to 2010 model years, The EL/Max level trims were limited to only 3 versions for Canada, Republic of China (Taiwan), and The Middle East, two for Mexico, and one for the Philippines. Canada's Expedition Max offered the Eddie Bauer, Limited and King Ranch trims, Mexico's Expedition Max in Limited and King Ranch trims, and the Middle East's EL level trims in XLT, Eddie Bauer and Limited. The Philippines' lone Expedition EL level trim was the Eddie Bauer model from 2007 to 2010.
After the 2011 model year Ford made changes in the international exportation of the EL/Max trims. As a result of the changes, the Limited trim became the only version available in Canada and Mexico as Eddie Bauer (in Canada) and King Ranch trims (in both Canada and Mexico) were discontinued, while the Philippines and the Middle East replaced the Eddie Bauer with the XLT trim. The Middle East also started to get all of the 5 US level base trims, including the new XL trims that took the XLT's place and the King Ranch trim.
With the 2015 refresh, the Expedition EL US level trims are the same as the standard versions: XLT, Limited, King Ranch, and Platinum, all four available in rear wheel and four wheel drive. The Canadian Expedition Max are only featured in Limited and Platinum level trims, also available in RWD and 4WD. Mexico's Expedition Max are available in rear wheel drive XLT only, but available in RWD and 4WD Limited versions. The Philippines, Republic of China (Taiwan), and Middle East ELs are only available in 4WD Limited trims.
With the introduction of the Expedition Max for the 2018 model year as the successor to the first generation Expedition EL, Ford plans to make the vehicle available globally, with North America in late 2017 and selected countries in early 2018.
FOUR-WHEEL DRIVE SYSTEM
Section::::Four-wheel drive system.
Selectable automatic full-time Control Trac four-wheel drive designed by BorgWarner is standard on all 4x4 Expeditions. There are four modes: Two High mode, Auto mode, Four High mode and Four Low mode. Each mode can be selected via a rotary control dial on the dash.
The Expedition's system uses a two-speed dual range BorgWarner transfer case with a software controlled variable intelligent locking center multi-disc differential. The four-wheel drive system does not use a planetary or bevel geared center differential, which are typically found in permanent four-wheel drive systems where torque is supplied to all four wheels.
!colspan=3Selectable Automatic Full-Time ControlTrac Four-Wheel Drive
! Two High (2H)
! Auto (4A)
! Four High (4H)
! Four Low (4L)
4WD Expeditions come with standard dual front frame-mounted closed-loop recovery hooks and available off-road under body protection. Steel plates are placed over vital areas with a composite shield for the fuel tank. Expedition 4x4s are tested alongside the F-150 and Super Duty trucks at Ford's California and Arizona proving grounds. Expedition is put through the same durability tests and evaluations to meet the same durability standards as its pickup truck brethren.
TRACTION CONTROL
Section::::Traction control.
Rear-wheel drive or all-wheel drive have conventional open-type differentials with a choice of axle ratios. Traction control systems, both mechanical and electronic, are optional.
Mechanical traction control (1997–2006)
Both first and second generation Ford Expeditions (UN93 and U222) had optional Traction-Lok rear limited-slip differential (LSD). The clutch packs inside the LSD tend to be weak, will wear over time, gradually losing their ability to transfer torque, and LSD will function like an open-type differential. The front differential on four-wheel drive models are open-type differential. The AdvanceTrac electronic stability control for the 2003 model year. The 2006 was the last model year for the Traction-Lok limited-slip differential.
Electronic traction control (2003–present)
AdvanceTrac electronic stability control was introduced for the 2003 model year as an optional extra on the second generation Ford Expedition (U222). Bundled with the electronic stability control system is four-wheel electronic traction control (functions at all wheels) for Expeditions with four-wheel drive. Two-wheel drive Expeditions only receive two-wheel electronic traction control for rear wheels. AdvanceTrac was made standard equipment on all third generation Expeditions (U324).
The traction control system uses four-wheel, four-sensor, four-channel anti-lock braking system (ABS) to apply and release the disc brakes on the drive wheel that has lost traction. The ABS clamps down on the slipping drive wheel or wheels, "brake locking" the differential, which can transfer up to 100 percent of supplied torque to the opposing drive wheel with better traction. By ABS "brake locking" both the front and rear differentials, the traction control system can simulate front and rear differential locks. The system works even if two of its drive wheels (one front, one rear) are completely off the ground.
Using the ABS brakes rather than mechanical limited-slip or locking devices inside the axle differentials gives quicker response, more seamless performance, and enhanced durability.
TERRAIN MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (2018–PRESENT)
Section::::Terrain Management System (2018–present).
Starting with the 2018 model year, the Expedition and Expedition MAX will utilize Ford's Terrain Management System. Buttons to control the 4x4 system are arranged around the central Terrain Management dial. The system is similar to the one found in the 2011–present Explorer, however the Explorer's system is more simplified. The Expedition's Terrain Management System is adapted from the SVT Raptor to allow use of a 4L (low-lock) mode as well as an electronic locking rear differential. Moreover, the Explorer's Terrain Management System has 4 (four) drive modes, while the Expedition has 7 (seven) drive modes, not including the 3 (three) 4x4 system direct drive modes.
Depending on the mode selected, Terrain Management will control, adjust, and fine tune the engine, transmission, center multi-disc differential lock, throttle response, four-wheel electronic traction control and electronic stability control (ESC) to adapt the SUV for optimal performance on the corresponding terrain.
TOWING CAPABILITY
Section::::Towing capability.
When first introduced in 1996, the Expedition competed with both the Chevrolet Tahoe and GMC Yukon in the full-size half-ton SUV towing segment. New competitors included the Dodge Durango (which was discontinued in 2009, but reintroduced in 2011), Nissan Armada, and Toyota Sequoia. Product research conducted by Ford indicated that 92 percent of Expedition owners use the SUV for vacations. Some 60 percent use it to transport outdoor sports equipment, while 40 percent of Expedition owners use the vehicle for towing. The half-ton Expedition EL/Max competes with the half-ton Chevrolet Suburban 1500 and GMC Yukon XL 1500 in the towing segment.
Since its introduction, the Expedition's braked trailer towing capacity has grown from 8,100 lbs (3,674 kg or 4.05 tons) to a current rating of 9,200 lbs (4,173 kg or 4.6 tons) when properly equipped. The list of towing features is also ever growing. Towing features common to all generations of the Expedition include: smallest possible turning radius for increased trailer maneuverability, large side view mirrors to improve rearward visibility, rearward-facing lane departure indicators which are helpful to other motorist when the Expedition is towing a long trailer providing added visual safety, heavy-duty flashers, heavy-duty large disc brakes to withstand prolonged braking while towing, and an available heavy-duty trailer towing package which includes necessary additions for heavy-duty towing.
As of the 2010 model year, the Expedition received trailer sway control (TSC) as standard equipment. TSC detects trailer oscillations and corrects it via asymmetrical ABS braking and reducing engine power until the Expedition and its trailer are both back under control.
HEAVY-DUTY TRAILER TOWING PACKAGE
Section::::Heavy-duty trailer towing package.
Expeditions equipped with the heavy-duty trailer towing package are prepped and readied, at the factory, for towing. The package includes a VESC (Vehicle Equipment Safety Commission) V-5 (or SAE J684) Class IV (Class 4) rated trailer hitch with weight distribution capability, heavy-duty radiator, heavy-duty auxiliary transmission fluid cooler, and hitch mounted 4 and 7-pin trailer electrical connectors.
For model years prior to 2013, these Expeditions are prewired for later installation of an after-market electronic trailer brake controller. The brake controller wiring harness is located under the dash on the driver's side. For the 2013 model year onward, these Expeditions are factory equipped with the TowCommand electronic trailer brake controller system. This features +/– gain brake adjustment with support for heavy-duty trailers with up to four axles (quad axle trailers) and is compatible with electrically actuated trailer drum brakes and electric-over-hydraulic (EOH) actuated trailer drum or disc brake systems. The trailer brake controller is fully integrated into the Expedition's four-wheel, four-sensor, four-channel anti-lock braking system (ABS), and trailer sway control (TSC).
Expeditions were offered with an adaptive pneumatic air-ride suspension system with self leveling, payload leveling and trailer load leveling capability from 1997 to 2013. For the 2014 model year, a Nivomat adaptive hydraulic suspension system with self leveling, payload leveling and trailer load leveling replaced the pneumatic system. Both systems can automatically detect when a heavy trailer is coupled, such as a travel trailer, and level the load. Additional ride-height sensors placed on the left and right sides of the SUV also monitor and compensate for any listing caused by improper cargo loading. This keeps the Expedition running straight and level while towing, and at night helps to keep the Expedition's headlamps from blinding oncoming traffic.
SPECIAL SERVICE VEHICLE
Section::::Special Service Vehicle.
To compete with large police SUVs that are sold by other automobile companies, primarily the Chevrolet Suburban, Ford has made a special version of the Expedition available to law enforcement agencies, fire departments, and EMS agencies. Ford calls it the Expedition Special Service Vehicle (SSV). The only differences between the standard Expedition and the Special Service Vehicle Expedition are provisions for emergency services related equipment such as radios, lightbars, and sirens.
With the fourth generation Expedition (2018–present) debuting in 2017, Ford announced that the standard size version will be sold to government agencies and law enforcement, available in the lower based XL trim only.
FUNKMASTER FLEX EDITION
Section::::Funkmaster Flex edition.
2008 was the only year for the Funkmaster Flex special edition Expedition. In 2005, Ford Motor Company teamed up with rapper and New York City radio personality Funkmaster Flex in a multi-year partnership to create a series of special edition Ford vehicles and advertise the Ford brand. One of those creations was a 2008 Ford Expedition bearing the rapper's name. This limited production Expedition featured a special Colorado Red and black two-tone paint job with orange pinstriping, 20 inch chrome wheels, 3D Carbon body kit, Funkmaster Flex badging and a custom black and Colorado Red leather interior on top of Expedition Limited standard equipment. The FMF Expedition went on sale in the fall of 2007 and production was limited to 650 units total.
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
Motor Trend gave the 2018 Expedition a good review in its February 14, 2018 article, in which they cite the vehicle's "blend of performance (both on- and off-road), comfort, utility, and tech [that] easily make it the new benchmark for the full-size SUV class." However the review notes that there were a few drawbacks in terms of hp acceleration (coming in second to the 2018 Nissan Armada but ahead of the 2018 Chevrolet Tahoe), off-road performance, and its MPG estimate.
The 2018 Expedition also ranked first among large SUVs with a score of 9.3 from U.S. News and World Report.
AWARDS
Section::::Awards.
The fourth generation Ford Expedition was nominated at the 2018 North American International Auto Show in the Truck of the Year category, only to lose out to its co-branded cousin Lincoln Navigator. The Expedition was runner-up.
YEARLY AMERICAN SALES
Section::::Yearly American sales.
! Calendar Year
! Total American sales
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ford Expedition official websites:
* U.S.A.
* Canada
* Mexico (Expedition/Max/King Ranch)
* Middle East
* Philippines
* Puerto Rico
