
LIST OF TALLEST BUILDINGS IN NEW YORK CITY
New York City, the most populous city in the United States, is home to over 6,486 completed high-rise buildings of at least 35 meters, of which at least 113 are taller than . The tallest building in New York is One World Trade Center, which rises . The 104-story skyscraper also stands as the tallest building in the United States, the tallest building in the Western Hemisphere, and the sixth-tallest building in the world. The second-tallest building in the city is 432 Park Avenue, standing at , and the third-tallest is the recently-topped-out 30 Hudson Yards. Not counting its antenna, the 4th-tallest is the 102-story Empire State Building in Midtown Manhattan, which was finished in 1931 and rises to , increased to by its antenna. It is the fifth-tallest building in the United States and the 37th-tallest building in the world.
The Empire State Building stood as the tallest building in the world from its completion until 1972, when the 110-story North Tower of the original World Trade Center was completed. At , The World Trade Center held the title until the completion of the 108-story Willis Tower (formerly known as the Sears Tower) in Chicago in 1974. The World Trade Center towers were destroyed by terrorist attacks in 2001, and the Empire State Building regained the title of tallest building in the city. It remained the tallest until April 2012, when the construction on One World Trade Center surpassed it. The fifth-tallest building in New York is the Bank of America Tower, which rises to , including its spire. If the Twin Towers were still standing today, they would be the third- and fourth-tallest buildings in the city, or second and third assuming the new buildings would not have been built. Only 432 Park Avenue is taller.
New York City skyscrapers are concentrated in Midtown and Lower Manhattan, although other neighborhoods of Manhattan and the boroughs of Brooklyn, Queens, and the Bronx also have a few high-rises. , the entire city had 241 buildings that rise at least in height, including those under construction, more than any other city in the United States.
Since 2003, New York City has seen the completion of that rise at least in height, including One World Trade Center. As of 2013, 20 more were under construction. One World Trade Center is part of the redevelopment of the World Trade Center, which also includes the 3 World Trade Center, the 4 World Trade Center, 7 World Trade Center and one under-construction building: the 2 World Trade Center.
Overall, , there were buildings under construction or proposed for construction in New York City.
HISTORY
Section::::History.
The history of skyscrapers in New York City began with the completion of the World Building in 1890; the structure rose to . Though not the city's first high-rise, it was the first building to surpass the spire of Trinity Church. The World Building, which stood as the tallest in the city until 1899, was demolished in 1955 to allow for the construction of an expanded entrance to the Brooklyn Bridge.
New York has played a prominent role in the development of the skyscraper; since 1890, eleven structures in the city having held the title of world's tallest building. New York City went through a very early high-rise construction boom that lasted from the early 1910s through the early 1930s, during which 16 of the city's 82 tallest buildings were built—including the Woolworth Building, the Bank of Manhattan Trust Building, the Chrysler Building and the Empire State Building, each of which was the tallest in the world at the time of its completion, the last remaining so for forty years.
A second skyscraper boom began in the early 1960s. Since then, the city has seen the completion of nearly 70 structures rising at least high, including the twin towers of the World Trade Center. One WTC also known as the North Tower, was the tallest building in the world from 1972 until 1973 and the tallest building in New York City until 2001. The North Tower, as well as the other six buildings in the World Trade Center complex, were destroyed in the September 11 attacks of 2001. One World Trade Center began construction in 2006 as the lead building of the new World Trade Center complex; upon its topping out in May 2013, the skyscraper surpassed the Willis Tower to become the tallest building in the United States.
TALLEST BUILDINGS
Section::::Tallest buildings.
This list ranks completed and topped out New York City skyscrapers that stand at least tall, based on standard height measurements. This includes spires and architectural details but does not include antenna masts. An equal sign (=) following a rank indicates the same height between two or more buildings. An asterisk (*) indicates that the building is still under construction, but has been topped out. The "Year" column indicates the year in which a building was completed.
! data-sort-type="number"  Rank
! data-sort-type="text"  Name
! class="unsortable" Image
! data-sort-type="number"  Height
! data-sort-type="number"  Floors
! data-sort-type="number"  Year
! data-sort-type="text"  Address
! data-sort-type="number"  Coordinates
! class="unsortable" Notes
45th-tallest building in the world, 6th-tallest in the United States; first skyscraper to receive a Platinum LEED certification. Roof height is .
Tied for 13th-tallest in the United States; first building in the world to rise higher than ; stood as the tallest building in the world from 1930 until 1931 when it was surpassed by the Empire State Building; tallest steel-framed brick building in the world. At its completion overtook the Eiffel Tower as the world's tallest man-made structure.
Was the tallest building in New York City before being surpassed by the Empire State Building.
Was the Tallest building in New York City before being surpassed by the Chrysler Building. Was the tallest mid-block building in the city from 1930 until the completion of One57 in 2014.
Formerly known as the U.S. Steel Building
Formerly known as the City Bank-Farmers Trust Building
Formerly known as Three World Financial Center and American Express Tower
Also known as Bertelsmann Building.
Topped out in April 2016.
Was the tallest building in New York City before being surpassed by the Woolworth Building.
Also known as 605 West 42nd Street and Atelier II. Largest single tower residence in New York City. Sky comprises 1,175 luxury units and includes more than 70,000 sq ft of amenity space.
Formerly known as the McGraw-Hill Building.
Tallest building in New York City outside of Manhattan; tallest building on Long Island and in the Borough of Queens; formerly known as the Citigroup Building
It topped out in March 2018.
Formerly known as the Sony Building and AT&T Building.
TALLEST BUILDINGS BY PINNACLE HEIGHT
Section::::Tallest buildings by pinnacle height.
This lists ranks buildings in New York City based on pinnacle height measurement, which includes antenna masts. Standard architectural height measurement, which excludes non-architectural antennas in building height, is included for comparative purposes. An equal sign (=) following a rank indicates the same height between two or more buildings. The "Year" column indicates the year in which a building was completed.
TALLEST BUILDINGS IN EACH BOROUGH
Section::::Tallest buildings in each borough.
This lists the tallest building in each borough of New York City based on standard height measurement. The "Year" column indicates the year in which a building was completed.
! Borough
! Name
! Height
! Floors
! Year
!class="unsortable"Source
TALLEST UNDER CONSTRUCTION OR PROPOSED
UNDER CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Tallest under construction or proposed.
Section::::Under construction.
This lists buildings that are currently under construction in New York City and are expected to rise to a height of at least . Buildings under construction that have already been topped out are also included, as are those whose construction has been suspended. For buildings whose heights have not yet been released by their developers, this table uses a floor count of 50 stories as the cutoff.
!class="unsortable" Image
! Floors
! Year 
!class="unsortable" 
1,401 (427)
57
2021
1,011 (306)
58
2022
* Table entries with dashes (—) indicate that information regarding expected building heights or dates of completion has not yet been released.
PROPOSED
* Table entries with dashes (—) indicate that information regarding building heights or dates of completion has not yet been released.
TALLEST DESTROYED
Section::::Tallest destroyed.
This table lists buildings in New York City that were destroyed or demolished and at one time stood at least in height.
Name
!Image
!width="75"Height
!Floors
!Completedin
!Destroyedin
!class="unsortable"Notes
TIMELINE OF TALLEST BUILDINGS
Section::::Timeline of tallest buildings.
This lists buildings that once held the title of tallest building in New York City. Both Trinity Church and the Empire State Building have held the title twice, the latter following the destruction of the World Trade Center in the September 11 attacks. The Empire State Building was surpassed by One World Trade Center in 2012.
! Name
! class="unsortable" Image
! Street address
! Years astallest
! Height
! Floors
! class="unsortable" Notes
SEE ALSO
* Architecture of New York City
* List of cities with the most skyscrapers
* List of tallest buildings in Upstate New York
* List of tallest buildings in Brooklyn
* List of tallest buildings in New Jersey
* List of tallest buildings in the United States
NOTES
REFERENCES
Section::::References.
Citations
Sources
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Diagram of New York City skyscrapers on SkyscraperPage
* 100 years of New York skyline on Favrify
