
GIDEA PARK RAILWAY STATION
Gidea Park railway station is on the Great Eastern Main Line, serving the neighbourhood of Gidea Park in the London Borough of Havering, east London. It is down the line from London Liverpool Street and is situated between Romford and Harold Wood. Its three-letter station code is GDP and it is in Travelcard zone 6.
The station is currently managed by TfL Rail. The vast majority of services call at Gidea Park as part of the -Liverpool Street stopping "metro" service operated by TfL Rail, but some Abellio Greater Anglia services for also call on Sundays. In autumn 2019 the TfL Rail service will be re-branded as the Elizabeth line as part of the Crossrail project. Eventually, the Elizabeth line service will be extended beyond Liverpool Street to Paddington, with onward connections from there to and Heathrow Airport.
HISTORY
Section::::History.
The station, constructed in a cutting, was opened as Squirrels Heath & Gidea Park on 1 December 1910 by the Great Eastern Railway on that company's main line out of London Liverpool Street. The name was switched to Gidea Park & Squirrels Heath in late 1913, but the "Squirrels Heath" suffix was dropped some time later.
On 2 January 1947, in darkness and dense fog, an express train from London to passed a signal at danger and collided with a stopping service bound for as it started to depart from Gidea Park on the country-bound main line. The Peterborough train was travelling at an estimated 30 to 35 mph on impact, which destroyed the rear three coaches of the Southend train. Seven people were killed in the crash and 45 were hospitalised. Two of the four lines through the station were reopened within two hours, and the other two followed the next day.
SERVICES
Section::::Services.
The following services typically call at Gidea Park during off-peak hours. Frequency is increased during peak times. Additionally, there is one late-night service to operated by Greater Anglia.
! Operator
! Route
! Rolling stock
! Typical frequency
! Notes
In 2017, new trains began entering service as Crossrail partially opened. The platforms at Gidea Park will be extended from their current length of to accommodate the new Crossrail trains which will be over long once extended to nine carriages. New lifts, signage, help points, customer information screens and CCTV will also be installed, and the footbridge and carriage-sidings will be refurbished.
CONNECTIONS
Section::::Connections.
London Buses routes 294, 496, 649, 650 and 674 serve the station.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
