
INCREDICOASTER
Incredicoaster is a steel roller coaster located at Disney California Adventure in Anaheim, California. Manufactured by Intamin, the ride opened to the public as California Screamin' on February 8, 2001. It is the only roller coaster at the Disneyland Resort with an inversion, and it's the fastest at the park with a top speed of .
California Screamin' closed in early 2018 and reopened as Incredicoaster, inspired by the 2004 computer-animated film The Incredibles and its 2018 sequel Incredibles 2, on June 23, 2018. Its opening coincided with the debut of the newly-revamped Pixar Pier section of the park, where the roller coaster is located.
HISTORY
Section::::History.
California Screamin' was designed by Ingenieur Büro Stengel GmbH and was built by Intamin. It is the eighth-longest rollercoaster in the world (and third-longest steel coaster in the United States), at long. It took of steel to build the ride. It is also the longest ride with an inversion (since Son of Beast became defunct). When the loop for Son of Beast at Kings Island was removed in 2006, California Screamin' became the longest looping coaster in the world. 
The coaster uses Linear Induction Motors (LIMs) to launch the train up the first hill as well as on the main lift midway through the ride. These motors replaced the traditional lift hill chain. This coaster is one of Disney Parks fastest attractions, accelerating guests from zero to in four seconds at the launch. The ride's launch system uses linear induction motors. 
Like most other coasters in Disney Parks, California Screamin' played a soundtrack during the ride, created by Gary Hoey and George Wilkins.
On January 3, 2007, the standard onboard audio track for California Screamin' was temporarily replaced with a remixed version of the Red Hot Chili Peppers' "Around the World," and the attraction was renamed Rockin' California Screamin'. This was promoted alongside Rockin' Space Mountain, a similar change made to Space Mountain in Disneyland, though that ride's audio was changed to the Red Hot Chili Peppers' cover version of "Higher Ground". These changes were part of the "Rockin' Both Parks" campaign. The standard audio track was restored when the campaign ended.
The original safety spiels were recorded by Dee Bradley Baker. On November 5, 2010, the attraction's original recorded safety spiels were updated with the voice of actor Neil Patrick Harris. Harris also recorded audio for the launch, counting down for guests. There are 108 acoustic devices to play the "Synchronized On-Board Audio Track" (S.O.B.A.T.) onboard each train, including high-rangers in the headrests, mid-rangers near riders' ears, and subwoofers underneath each rider's seat. 
After the refurbishment of Disney California Adventure, from 2007-2012, the Mickey Mouse head located behind the vertical loop was replaced with a large sun icon along with the name "Paradise Pier" above the sun.
Disney announced a complete renovation of Paradise Pier on November 2, 2017, into Pixar Pier. With it, would come the transformation of California Screamin' into Incredicoaster, which would be re-themed to and inspired by Pixar Animation Studios' The Incredibles.
On January 8, 2018, the attraction closed. It reopened as Incredicoaster on June 23, 2018.
PRESHOW AND RIDE
Section::::Preshow and ride.
Guests enter as TV screens display footage of the Incredibles and Edna Mode being interviewed for the ride's rechristening as the Incredicoaster. While they are being interviewed, Jack-Jack begins using his unpredictable super powers much to his family's frustration and Edna's amusement. As the riders board the cars and take off from the station, Elastigirl asks Edna to look after Jack-Jack. The riders pass by the VIP room showing Edna with Jack-Jack as he teleports around. Moments later Edna announces that Jack-Jack has escaped. The Incredibles then take off throughout the ride trying to catch Jack-Jack as he uses his vast array of super powers to "attack" certain points on the ride. Dash tries to use his super speed to catch Jack-Jack in the first tunnel while Jack-Jack shoots lasers from his eyes. In the second tunnel, Elastigirl tries using her stretching powers to grab Jack-Jack while he is phasing in and out of the tunnel wall. Mr. Incredible has used his super strength to smash through the wall and is trying to catch Jack-Jack by offering him a cookie. Jack-Jack then sets the third tunnel a blaze with his fire powers, forcing Violet to put an invisible force field around the tunnel to put out the flames and keep the riders safe. Things get worse when Jack-Jack begins using his ability to multiply and dozens of Jack-Jacks begin popping up everywhere. Eventually, Jack-Jack makes it back to the station safely. This time he has increased in size, but Edna manages to keep him calm by giving him a cookie.
CAST
* Craig T. Nelson as Mr. Incredible
* Holly Hunter as Elastigirl
* Sarah Vowell as Violet Parr
* Huck Miller as Dash Parr
* Brad Bird as Edna Mode
INCIDENTS
Section::::Incidents.
On July 29, 2005, 25 guests were injured when the purple train rear-ended the red train. Of the 48 guests aboard the two trains, 15 were taken to the hospital for treatment of minor injuries. The accident occurred on the section of track about short of the loading station. A full ride stop was activated with the red train stopped. The brake segment that was supposed to have stopped the purple train failed, and the purple train continued until it collided with the stopped red train. An investigation showed that a faulty brake valve, installed a few days earlier by Disney (not by the ride manufacturer Intamin), was the cause.
On July 22, 2011, 23 people were rescued from California Screamin' by firefighters when a rider's backpack fell out of a train and landed on the track, causing the orange train to stop just after the loop but before the next block brake and make it continuously roll back and forth. It reopened two days later after the train was winched up the next hill, had its damaged wheels replaced and was allowed to complete the circuit.
On May 2, 2016, the coaster was halted when a passenger used a selfie stick. The ride was evacuated after a 20-minute stop.
On August 6, 2016, passengers on the ride were stranded for 45 minutes before being rescued when a fallen purse triggered an automatic stop.
GALLERY
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Incrediblecoasters Images
* California Screamin' Details about the roller coaster on Ultimate Rollercoaster.com.
