
FRENCH TOAST CRUNCH
French Toast Crunch is a breakfast cereal launched in 1995 naturally flavored to taste like French toast, by the General Mills company. The cereal pieces originally looked like mini slices of French toast, but General Mills changed the cereal to a style similar in appearance to Cinnamon Toast Crunch; a thin, wavy square sprinkled with cinnamon and sugar flavoring.
In 2006, General Mills discontinued French Toast Crunch in the United States. Popular demand led General Mills to reintroduce the product on December 5, 2014.
During this time, French Toast Crunch was and still is produced and marketed in Canada as "French Toast Crunch" and "Croque pain doré." Canadian French Toast Crunch is made in the original recipe and form (mini French toast). It is available at most big retail chains including Walmart, Kroger, Target, and Costco.
HISTORY
Section::::History.
French Toast Crunch has been described as crispy, sweetened corn cereal. The cereal pieces resembled tiny pieces of toast however, the cereal pieces later became curved square pieces found in its sister-cereal, Cinnamon Toast Crunch.
On the back of the original French Toast Crunch cereal boxes, they discussed how the baking cartoon mascot, Wendell, created French Toast Crunch.
The back of the box reads:
ADVERTISEMENT
Section::::Advertisement.
TV commercials would ask questions regarding "What makes French Toast Crunch?" This question was answered with the following detailed response: 
DISCONTINUATION AND RELAUNCH
Section::::Discontinuation and relaunch.
In 2006, French Toast Crunch was discontinued in the United States, but remained available in Canada and Australia.
On December 5, 2014, General Mills announced that they would return French Toast Crunch to nationwide production in the United States starting at the end of January 2015, with the cereal being available at selected supermarkets and retailers at this point in time. The design of the cereal flakes was reverted to the original style of miniature pieces of toast rather than plain squares.
In a statement posted on the General Mills website, they had the following to say about the cereal's return:
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* General Mills Website
* General Mills Introduces French Toast Crunch
* French Toast Crunch Cereal here to usa
