
GONNA FLY NOW
"Gonna Fly Now", also known as "Theme from Rocky", is the theme song from the movie Rocky, composed by Bill Conti with lyrics by Carol Connors and Ayn Robbins, and performed by DeEtta West and Nelson Pigford. Released in February 1977 with the movie Rocky, the song became part of American popular culture after main character Rocky Balboa as part of his daily training regimen runs up the 72 stone steps leading to the entrance of the Philadelphia Museum of Art in Philadelphia and raises his arms in a victory pose, while the song plays. The song was written in Philadelphia. The song is often played at sporting events, especially in Philadelphia.
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
The song (whose lyrics are only 30 words long) was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song in the 49th Academy Awards. The version of the song from the movie, performed by Conti with an orchestra, hit number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in 1977, while a version by jazz trumpeter Maynard Ferguson hit the top 30. Disco versions by Rhythm Heritage and Current were on the chart at the same time (Conti's own version reveals some early disco influence in the orchestration). Billboard ranked Conti's version as the No. 21 song of 1977. Conti's single was certified Gold by the RIAA, for shipments exceeding one million in the United States. The American Film Institute placed it 58th on its AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs list.
VARIATIONS
Section::::Variations.
In Rocky II, an alternative version of the song was used, with a children's choir singing the chorus. Rocky III included an updated disco influenced arrangement during the training montage on the beach. This recording is however missing from the soundtrack album, the sleeve notes of which say "All music on this album selected by Sylvester Stallone", who instead opted to reprise the original versions of "Gonna Fly Now" and "Reflections" from the first film and "Conquest" from the second installment.
Rocky IV was scored by Vince DiCola who mainly introduced new themes of his own but "Gonna Fly Now" returned with its composer for later installments. In Rocky V, two different versions of the song are played: an instrumental horn version and a different orchestral version. In Rocky Balboa, a slightly different version of the song used more trumpets and different vocal tones. also includes a vocal remix performed by Natalie Wilde. Creed samples the first few notes of the track during the film's last fight, as does its sequel, Creed II.
PERSONNEL
* DeEtta West - vocals
* Nelson Pigford - vocals
CHART PERFORMANCE
WEEKLY CHARTS
Section::::Chart performance.
Section::::Weekly charts.
!Year
!Chart (1977)
!Peakposition
rowspan=6 align=center1977
Australia KMR
align="center"13
Canadian RPM Top Singles
align="center"8
US Billboard Adult Contemporary
align="center"20
align=center2007
US Hot Ringtones (Billboard)
align=center19
YEAR-END CHARTS
IN POPULAR CULTURE
Section::::In popular culture.
Due to its original use, the song (or a soundalike of it) is used frequently in various forms of popular media where a main character is forced to train hard in order to defeat an opponent, often during a montage sequence.
American politician and former Vice President Walter Mondale used "Gonna Fly Now" as his campaign song in 1984.
FRENCH RADIO
Section::::French radio.
The daily French radio program Les Grosses Têtes, on the RTL French radio network, use an arrangement by Gaya Bécaud from Gonna Fly Now.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
