
JIM DUGGAN
James Edward Duggan Jr. (born January 14, 1954), better known by his ring name "Hacksaw" Jim Duggan, is an American professional wrestler. He is signed to WWE on a Legends contract. His best-known character is that of an American patriot, which sees him use a 2x4 length of wood as a weapon, the battle cry "Hooo!" and the U-S-A! cheer.
In the World Wrestling Federation (WWF, now known as WWE), Duggan was the winner of the first ever Royal Rumble match in 1988 and in World Championship Wrestling (WCW), he was a one time United States Heavyweight Champion and a one time (and the final) World Television Champion.
EARLY LIFE AND CAREER
Section::::Early life and career.
Duggan grew up in Glens Falls, New York, where he became a star athlete in high school. Duggan is of English and Scottish ancestry. He was raised Presbyterian. His father was the Chief of police for the City of Glens Falls. Duggan was a letterman in football, track, wrestling, and basketball. In wrestling, Duggan won the New York State High School wrestling championship, unlimited weight class division – the first wrestler from Glens Falls to do so.
Upon graduating from high school, he was recruited by Ohio State University, but would instead choose to play football at Southern Methodist University (SMU), where he was eventually voted team captain. Duggan earned his bachelor's degree in applied plant biology. After college, Duggan was signed by the Atlanta Falcons of the National Football League, but was released after being plagued by knee injuries.
PROFESSIONAL WRESTLING CAREER
EARLY CAREER (1979-1982)
Section::::Professional wrestling career.
Section::::Early career (1979-1982).
Duggan broke into the professional wrestling business thanks in large part to wrestler Fritz Von Erich. The two met while Duggan was on a recruiting trip to SMU. Duggan's first professional match was in 1979 against Gino Hernandez. Duggan began his career as a villain. Training at the Sportatorium in Dallas, Texas as well as with Samoan wrestling promoter Peter Maivia, Duggan gained the attention of Vince McMahon, Sr. and the World Wrestling Federation (WWF).
After a brief stint with the WWF, Duggan began to work regularly for Georgia Championship Wrestling. During this time, Duggan was known by two in-ring aliases: in the United States as "Big" Jim Duggan and in Hawaii as The Convict, a masked wrestler. After wrestling for a Birmingham, Alabama-based promotion, Duggan began wrestling in a promotion based in San Antonio, Texas where he adopted his well-known "Hacksaw" nickname.
MID-SOUTH WRESTLING/UNIVERSAL WRESTLING FEDERATION (1982–1986)
Section::::Mid-South Wrestling/Universal Wrestling Federation (1982–1986).
In 1982, Duggan made his debut in Mid-South Wrestling. Upon debuting as a heel, and bounty hunter for Skandor Akbar, Duggan soon became a member of the Rat Pack faction, alongside Ted DiBiase, Matt Bourne, and Mr. Olympia. After newcomer "Hacksaw" Butch Reed debuted within the promotion, Duggan and Reed had a personal feud for a time over who would be the true "Hacksaw". The Rats also feuded with stars such as Reed, Magnum T.A. and the Junkyard Dog. During this time, Duggan interfered in a DiBiase/JYD match while wearing a gorilla suit during the Louisiana State Fair, causing JYD to lose a "Loser Leaves Town" match in Shreveport, Louisiana. After DiBiase aligned himself with Skandor Akbar, Duggan refused to go along with him and became a face for the first time in his career. At this time, Duggan began carrying his iconic 2x4.
As a fan favorite, he won the Mid-South Tag Team Championship with Magnum T.A. and later won the North American Heavyweight Championship. After the Mid-South North American title was retired when Mid-South became the Universal Wrestling Federation (UWF) in 1986, Duggan lost to Terry Gordy in a tournament final to determine the first UWF World Heavyweight Champion. Duggan then teamed up with Terry Taylor and won the UWF World Tag Team Championship for the second time. After losing a Loser Leaves Town match to the One Man Gang, Duggan left the UWF for the World Wrestling Federation (WWF).
WORLD WRESTLING FEDERATION (1987 - 1993)
EARLY FEUDS (1987)
Section::::World Wrestling Federation (1987 - 1993).
Section::::Early feuds (1987).
Duggan was signed to the WWF in January 1987, making his first major appearance with the WWF at WrestleMania III, where he also made his pay-per-view debut. In the weeks preceding WrestleMania, Duggan began his first WWF feud with Nikolai Volkoff. At the event, he ran to ringside prior to a match between The Killer Bees and The Iron Sheik and Nikolai Volkoff and interrupted Volkoff's pre-match singing of the Russian national anthem. Duggan had previously done this on TV matches leading up to the event.
On May 26, 1987 Duggan and the Iron Sheik were arrested for DUI in New Jersey. Duggan was on the verge of release from the company, but was ultimately brought back in a lower spot on roster. Although he did not win any major titles in the promotion, for seven years he was a consistent fan favorite with his patriotic gimmick. His character was mainly comical, as he rarely was in major contention for titles. His first major WWF match was at the first-ever Survivor Series pay-per-view in 1987, when he participated in the first Survivor Series match and was a member of the winning team.
FIRST ROYAL RUMBLE WINNER (1988–1989)
Section::::First Royal Rumble winner (1988–1989).
By the late fall of 1987, Duggan received his first major push since his return, being placed in a feud opposite "King" Harley Race, who was using a monarch gimmick who sneered at wrestlers he thought were below him. Duggan vowed he would never give in to Race's demands to bow to him, and during a televised confrontation, took Race's crown and cape, though Race would later get them back. At the 1987 Slammy Awards, where Duggan presented the nominees for "Best Ring Apparel," an on-stage shoving match between him and the winner (Race), a wild brawl broke out between the two, going backstage and eventually reaching back to the main stage before interrupting another award presentation and Gorilla Monsoon stepping in to separate the two. Duggan eventually defeated Race several times in both televised and non-televised shows.
Duggan participated in the first-ever Royal Rumble match in 1988, where he was the 13th of twenty entrants. He won the match after he last eliminated the One Man Gang.
At WrestleMania IV, he participated in a 14-man tournament for the vacant WWF World Heavyweight Championship, where he lost to Ted DiBiase in the first round after interference from André the Giant. Shortly after WrestleMania IV, Duggan -- upset that André cost him his match -- came to the ring during one of André's matches and challenged him; a feud erupted when André suddenly grabbed Duggan and began throttling him, before Duggan knocked André out with his 2x4 board. André generally came out the winner in their matches, usually by interference from André's manager Bobby Heenan. André also interfered in several of Duggan's matches against other wrestlers, including Hercules on the April 30 edition of Saturday Night's Main Event.
Duggan earned a shot at the Intercontinental Heavyweight Championship against The Honky Tonk Man in July 1988, but Honky Tonk got himself disqualified, thus retaining the title.
Duggan then began displaying traits of an American patriot by feuding with several foreign villains in the fall of 1988. He got involved in a feud with Dino Bravo, and the two were on opposing sides as Jake "The Snake" Roberts' team fought André the Giant's at the 1988 Survivor Series. Duggan was disqualified after he used his 2x4 on Bravo. Duggan's team eventually lost the match. His next feud was with Russian Boris Zhukov, whom he defeated in a flag match on the November 26 edition of Saturday Night's Main Event. He restarted his feud with Dino Bravo, and at the 1989 Royal Rumble, Duggan and The Hart Foundation (Bret Hart and Jim Neidhart) defeated Bravo and The Fabulous Rougeau Brothers (Jacques and Raymond) in a two out of three falls match. He was involved in a rivalry with Bad News Brown, which culminated in a match at WrestleMania V where both men fought to a no contest.
AMERICAN PATRIOT (1989–1993)
Section::::American patriot (1989–1993).
In mid-1989, he started a feud with King Haku, who was awarded the crown on the July 9, 1988 edition of Superstars when Harley Race was forced to vacate the crown due to injuries sustained in a match against Hulk Hogan on the March 12, 1988 edition of Saturday Night's Main Event. Duggan defeated Haku to win the crown and earn the title of "King of the WWF" on the May 13, 1989 edition of Superstars. On the May 27 edition of Saturday Night's Main Event, Duggan earned a shot at the Intercontinental Championship against "Ravishing" Rick Rude. Duggan won the match by countout, and Rude retained the title, as a title cannot change hands via countout or disqualification. At SummerSlam, Duggan teamed with Demolition (Ax and Smash) in a six-man tag team match and defeated André the Giant and The Twin Towers (Akeem and The Big Bossman).
He eventually lost his crown to "Macho Man" Randy Savage, who began calling himself "Macho King", and started a feud with Savage. At Survivor Series, he captained a team dubbed "The 4x4's" against Savage's team, "The King's Court". Although Duggan eliminated Greg Valentine with his 3-Point Stance Clothesline, Duggan's team lost the match. He faced Savage again on the January 27 edition of Saturday Night's Main Event. Duggan defeated another former rival, Dino Bravo at WrestleMania VI. He began teaming with his former rival, Nikolai Volkoff and started a feud with The Orient Express (Tanaka and Sato), whom they beat at SummerSlam. He began a short feud with WWF World Heavyweight Champion Sgt. Slaughter and faced Slaughter for the title on the February 1 edition of The Main Event. Slaughter retained the title by getting himself disqualified.
In late 1991, he patched up things with Sgt. Slaughter, who had turned babyface, and the pair formed a tag team. At Survivor Series, the duo joined the Texas Tornado and Tito Santana in an elimination match to defeat a team led by Col. Mustafa. On the February 8 edition of Saturday Night's Main Event, Duggan and Slaughter defeated the Beverly Brothers (Blake and Beau). At WrestleMania VIII, he teamed up with Virgil, Sgt. Slaughter, and Big Bossman against The Nasty Boys (Jerry Sags and Brian Knobs), The Mountie, and Repo Man. Slaughter eventually left active wrestling and Duggan continued to pursue his singles career again.
In mid-1992, Duggan was moved to undercard status, working with Repo Man in house shows. In early 1993, he was involved in a feud with the then near 600 pound Yokozuna, who was the number one contender to the WWF Championship. Manager Mr. Fuji was bad mouthing America and Duggan challenged his protégé to a match. The match was promoted by claiming that no one had knocked Yokozuna off his feet, even though Yokozuna had fallen off his feet shortly before, during the 1993 Royal Rumble match. The stipulations to the match were if Duggan knocked Yokozuna off his feet, Duggan would win. On the February 6 edition of Superstars, Duggan won the match after knocking Yokozuna down completely, but then was manhandled by the much bigger Yokozuna after the match and fell victim to four Banzai Drops, sidelining Duggan for about four months.
Duggan eventually returned to television and started a feud with then-Intercontinental Champion Shawn Michaels, challenging him for the title on the May 3 edition of Monday Night Raw. Michaels ran through the crowd, and retained the title by countout. On the next show, to prevent Michaels from pulling the stunt again, Duggan received a return bout in a lumberjack match which Michaels won on a disqualification. As Michaels and the lumberjacks brawled after the match, Duggan came to and cleared the ring with his 2-by-4. Duggan then competed in the King of the Ring tournament, defeating Papa Shango to qualify before losing to Bam Bam Bigelow in the quarterfinals. He continued to appear on WWF programming until the summer, when he left the company after losing several pre-Summerslam matches to Yokozuna.
WORLD CHAMPIONSHIP WRESTLING (1994 - 2001)
UNITED STATES HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPION (1994)
Section::::World Championship Wrestling (1994 - 2001).
Section::::United States Heavyweight Champion (1994).
After spending a year wrestling independents throughout the Northeast and a tour of Austria for Catch Wrestling Association, Duggan signed a contract with World Championship Wrestling (WCW) in the summer of 1994. He debuted on the August 6 edition of WCW Saturday Night, defeating Rip Rogers. A month later at Fall Brawl, as a replacement for the injured Ricky Steamboat, he defeated Steve Austin in a squash match lasting thirty-five seconds to win the United States Heavyweight Championship. After becoming champion, he quickly started a feud with Austin, and eventually defeated him in a title rematch at Halloween Havoc by disqualification. The two had a second title rematch on the November 16 edition of Clash of the Champions, where Duggan retained the title again by disqualification. Duggan's reign ended at Starrcade (1994), where he was defeated by Vader.
VARIOUS FEUDS (1995–1999)
Section::::Various feuds (1995–1999).
After he lost the U.S. title to Vader, Duggan moved to the mid-card division and began wrestling on Saturday Night. He defeated Bunkhouse Buck at SuperBrawl V. He faced former WWF rival Meng (known as Haku in WWF) in a martial arts match at Uncensored, which Meng won. At The Great American Bash, he defeated Sgt. Craig Pittman by disqualification in Pittman's pay-per-view debut. At Bash at the Beach (1995), Duggan lost to Kamala.
In late 1995, Duggan started a feud with Big Bubba Rogers, which culminated in a Taped Fist match at World War 3, which Rogers won. Duggan participated in the first-ever three ring, 60 man battle royal for the vacant World Heavyweight Championship, but was eliminated. He fought Loch Ness to a double disqualification at a Main Event taping before SuperBrawl VI. Duggan then started a short feud with Diamond Dallas Page, to whom he lost in a Taped Fist match at Bash at the Beach. At World War 3, he unsuccessfully participated in a three ring 60 man battle royal to determine the #1 contender to the WCW World Heavyweight Championship. Duggan had no major pay-per-view matches for over two years before he disappeared in 1998 after he was diagnosed with kidney cancer.
After successfully beating his cancer, Duggan returned to wrestling and replaced Buff Bagwell in a match against Berlyn at Fall Brawl, which Duggan lost. Soon after, Duggan became involved in a storyline where he became a janitor for WCW. Duggan then started a feud with the anti-American stable the Revolution (Shane Douglas, Dean Malenko, Perry Saturn, and Asya). At Starrcade (1999), he and his surprise partners, the newly reunited Varsity Club (Kevin Sullivan, Mike Rotunda, and Rick Steiner), faced the Revolution in a losing effort after the Club turned on Duggan. As a result of losing, the next night on Nitro, Duggan was forced to denounce the U.S. flag but he refused to do so. In response, the Revolution attacked him and began beating him until The Filthy Animals, who were also feuding with the Revolution, saved Duggan.
WORLD TELEVISION CHAMPION, TEAM CANADA AND DEPARTURE (2000–2001)
Section::::World Television Champion, Team Canada and departure (2000–2001).
During this period, he found the World Television Championship in a trash can, which had been thrown away by the previous champion Scott Hall earlier and claimed it for himself. He would make title defenses exclusively on Saturday Night, and remained champion until the title was deactivated. After WCW was rebooted and the nWo storyline ended, it was replaced by two new factions in WCW called The Millionaire's Club and the New Blood, which began feuding with one another. The Millionaire's Club consisted of veterans and the New Blood consisted of young wrestlers of the 1990s. Duggan joined the Millionaire's Club and helped them in their war against the New Blood.
Near the end of his career in WCW, he became involved in more major storylines, including one that involved him becoming a villain by abandoning the patriotic gimmick for a short time to join Lance Storm and his faction Team Canada. This angle began when Duggan started working with the Misfits In Action (MIA) but at Fall Brawl, he turned on MIA's leader U.S. Champion General Rection during Rection's title defense against Team Canada's Lance Storm. Duggan was the special guest enforcer for the match, and helped Storm in winning the match. During this time Duggan shaved his trademark beard, didn't bring his trademark 2x4 to the ring, and sang "O Canada". At Halloween Havoc, Duggan and Storm teamed up against General Rection in a handicap match for Storm's U.S. Title. Duggan missed an attack on Rection, which led to Rection pinning Duggan to win the match. Duggan continued to unintentionally cost Team Canada many of their victories, but he helped Storm to defeat The Cat in a match at Starrcade. However, after the match, Team Canada turned on Duggan, who then began feuding with Team Canada, and at Sin he was the special guest referee in a Penalty Box match between Team Canada and the Filthy Animals. Despite Duggan's role as the referee, Team Canada won the match after Storm forced Kidman to submit.
INDEPENDENT CIRCUIT AND TOTAL NONSTOP ACTION WRESTLING (2002–2005)
Section::::Independent circuit and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (2002–2005).
After WCW was purchased by the WWF in March 2001, Duggan began wrestling in the independent circuit. On December 5, 2002, Duggan defeated Krusher Kong at LWE Xplosion. On the March 12, 2003 pay-per-view of NWA Total Nonstop Action (TNA), Duggan made a surprise appearance and defeated fellow WCW alum Mike Sanders. Duggan made another appearance in TNA on October 29, where he lost to Jeff Jarrett.
RETURN TO WWE (2005 - 2009)
TEAMING WITH EUGENE (2005–2006)
Section::::Return to WWE (2005 - 2009).
Section::::Teaming with Eugene (2005–2006).
Duggan appeared on the October 3, 2005 edition of Raw, dubbed "The Homecoming" along with several other WWF/E alumni. He and the other legends attacked Rob Conway after Conway came to the ring and insulted them. He was also one of the "legends" available for fans to select to team with Eugene in a match at Taboo Tuesday to face the team of Conway and Tyson Tomko (Jimmy Snuka was chosen instead of Duggan). He returned to WWE again after Royal Rumble, with a message from John Cena to Lita after Edge lost the WWE Championship: "HOOOOO!" Duggan and Edge began a short feud with each other which culminated in a match that occurred two weeks later on Raw, which Edge won after Lita provided a distraction.
After feuding with Edge and Lita, he became mentor and tutor to Eugene and the two feuded with the Spirit Squad. He began working on Heat but also made a few appearances on Raw with Eugene and The Highlanders. On the November 6 edition of Raw, Duggan and Eugene faced the Spirit Squad in a match with the stipulation that the losing team would disband and never team up again. After Duggan was caught off guard after the other Spirit Squad members interfered and then pinned for the win, Eugene snapped and attacked Duggan. He started a feud with Eugene, and three weeks later, the two had a match with each other, which Eugene won.
VARIOUS APPEARANCES (2007–2009)
Section::::Various appearances (2007–2009).
At New Year's Revolution, Duggan teamed with Super Crazy in a tag team turmoil match to determine the number one contenders to the World Tag Team Championship, in a losing effort. On the January 15 edition of Raw, Duggan was dragged out by Rated-RKO (Edge and Randy Orton) and was beaten to a pulp. Edge and Orton feared Duggan would help out Shawn Michaels in a handicap match and wanted to set an example for anyone else backstage that wished to do the same. On the March 5 edition of Raw, he faced Chris Masters in a Masterlock Challenge, but was unable to break the hold.
After months of wrestling on Heat, Duggan returned to Raw in July, teaming up with The Sandman and feuding with Carlito and William Regal. This team was short lived as Duggan soon returned to Heat and Sandman was soon released from his contract with WWE. On the August 6 edition of Raw, Duggan was a contestant in the WWE Dating Game, a parody of The Dating Game. However, Duggan lost when Maria chose Ron Simmons.
On December 31, he lost a 2008 Royal Rumble qualifying match to the returning Umaga. After that, he began primarily appearing on Heat once again, defeating locals and teaming with Super Crazy. On the March 17 episode of Raw, he participated in a 17-on-2 handicap elimination tag team match as part of the 17 members of the Raw roster against John Cena and Randy Orton. After Cody Rhodes was eliminated, all the remaining Raw wrestlers attacked Cena and Orton, resulting in their disqualification. Duggan also took part in a 12-on-12 tag team preview match on the March 25 episode of ECW. He competed 24-man battle royal was held just before WrestleMania XXIV aired to determine the #1 contender for an ECW Championship match. The match was eventually won by Kane.
In the summer of 2008, Duggan started a short feud with Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase after Rhodes and DiBiase tried to convince Duggan to retire and let the young talent run the show. Soon after, Duggan would come out and announce that he would take Rhodes and DiBiase's advice and retire, but Jerry Lawler stopped him by convincing Duggan to stay. Duggan and Lawler then wrestled Rhodes and DiBiase on the August 25, 2008 edition of Raw, but lost the match. On the October 20 edition of Raw, Duggan confronted Santino Marella and Beth Phoenix during one of Marella's tirades against his three possible opponents at Cyber Sunday (Roddy Piper, Goldust, and The Honky Tonk Man). Upset at being interrupted, Marella took off his clothes, getting ready to fight Duggan. Yet before a fight could begin, Marella instructed Phoenix to throw the clothes in Duggan's face, a move that temporarily distracted Duggan. Marella then smashed a guitar over Duggan's head, ending the segment. Duggan would appear on Raw's 800th episode during Kung Fu Naki's in-ring dance segment, which also involved various other members of the WWE roster.
In 2009, Duggan appeared in the 2009 Royal Rumble match, entering at #29 and setting a record for the most years between Royal Rumble appearances. He was eliminated from the match by Big Show. On the August 10 episode of Raw, Duggan made his final televised appearance as Sgt. Slaughter had him come out in place of Bret Hart, due to the episode taking place in Canada, when he introduced "The best there was, the best there is, and the best there ever will be" in order to mock the Canadian fans.
INDEPENDENT CIRCUIT (2009–PRESENT)
Section::::Independent circuit (2009–present).
He then resumed wrestling on the independent circuit. He recently appeared on Pro Wrestling Ohio's "Wrestlelution 3" where he defeated "The Megastar" Marion Fontaine.
On November 30, 2013, at WrestleCade 2013, Duggan defeated Daivari.
He has signed on with Global Force Wrestling as a "legend" to help promote GFW events and tours. To promote the shows, GFW's Jeff Jarrett and Duggan have appeared at Dell Diamond on Thursday, May 28. 
In January 2016, Duggan appeared in an event for Modern Vintage Wrestling in Wilmington, North Carolina.
On May 6, 2017, at AWF Head to the Edge, Duggan defeated Josh Price. 
On June 1, 2018, Duggan wrestled for Impact Pro Wrestling at the Armageddon Expo, held at the Horncastle Arena in Christchurch, New Zealand. He defeated Mr Burns to win the IPW Armageddon Cup. 
SECOND RETURN TO WWE (2011–2012)
Section::::Second return to WWE (2011–2012).
On April 2, 2011, Duggan was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by fellow inductee "The Million Dollar Man" Ted DiBiase.
Duggan returned to wrestling in WWE with an appearance at the 2012 Royal Rumble and entered the Royal Rumble match as the #19 entrant and was eliminated by Cody Rhodes. On the February 3, 2012 episode of SmackDown, Duggan teamed with Santino Marella in a losing effort against the WWE Tag Team Champions Primo and Epico. On April 10, 2012, Duggan made an appearance on SuperSmackDown LIVE: Blast from the Past, where he lost to Hunico by disqualification. Later that year, he appeared on the July 3 SuperSmackDown LIVE: The Great American Bash event, teaming with Sgt. Slaughter and Santino Marella to face Hunico, Camacho, and Drew McIntyre.
OTHER MEDIA
Section::::Other media.
It was announced in February 2012 that Duggan would appear on a WWE original reality show called WWE Legends House. The show premiered on the WWE Network on April 17, 2014.
Duggan appears as himself in the film Pro Wrestlers vs Zombies, in which he battles the undead with his 2x4.
In 1991 Duggan appeared in the Harry and the Hendersons TV series' 16th episode.
Duggan appears in the sixth episode of the second season of GamesMaster in the UK, where he played WWF on the Super Nintendo against a boy he picked from the crowd, Hacksaw played as Macho Man Randy Savage and was beaten.
Duggan also appeared in the season five finale of Duck Dynasty.
Duggan and former WWF announcer Sean Mooney began recording a weekly podcast on the MLW Radio Network called Primetime with Hacksaw Jim Duggan and Sean Mooney. Duggan left the podcast after 18 episodes leaving Mooney to host the show solo under the new title of Primetime with Sean Mooney.
In 2017, Duggan released the first issue of a biographical comic book miniseries through Squared Circle Comics, titled Hacksaw Jim Duggan.
In 2018, Duggan's trademark "Hooooo!" shout was used in Tuxedo and Zapp's song "Shy" in live performances and on TV appearances.
PERSONAL LIFE
Section::::Personal life.
Duggan and his wife Debra have two daughters, Celia and Rebecca. He is a close friend of Willie Robertson who owns the Duck Commanders.
In 1987, Duggan and the Iron Sheik (Khosrow Vaziri) were pulled over by New Jersey police before a WWF event, suspecting Duggan of driving under the influence. After a search of the vehicle and the persons, police discovered that Duggan was under the influence of marijuana and alcohol, while Vaziri was high on cocaine. Small amounts of cocaine were also found in the vehicle. Duggan received a conditional release while Vaziri was placed on probation for a year. The scandal that erupted after two in-ring enemies were found drinking and doing drugs together led to the end of the angle, the Sheik's release, and Duggan's temporary departure from WWF. Duggan soon returned to wrestling.
title=
On September 7, 1998, Duggan announced live on WCW Monday Nitro that he was diagnosed with kidney cancer. He underwent successful surgery, and because of the cancer was detected very early, no chemotherapy was needed. He wouldn't wrestle again until April 1999.
In November 2013 Duggan started an IndieGoGo campaign to cover the cost repairing his torn rotator cuff. Funding closed December 2013 and raised $10,396; well over the goal of $6,500.
Duggan is a supporter of Scottish football club Rangers F.C. and has also signed up as a life member to fans group Rangers First.
In November 2018, Duggan was hospitalized in the intensive care unit for an undisclosed reason.
CHAMPIONSHIPS AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS
* George Tragos/Lou Thesz Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
* Frank Gotch Award (2011)
* Impact Pro Wrestling
* Armageddon Cup (1 time)
* International Wrestling Association of Japan
* IWA World Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* International Wrestling Cartel
* IWC Tag Team Championship (1 time) – with Scottie Gash
* Pro Wrestling Alabama
* PWA Southern Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Nigel Sherrod
* Pro Wrestling Illustrated
* PWI ranked him #66 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 1993
* PWI ranked him #157 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the "PWI Years" in 2003
* Pro Wrestling Mid-South
* Legends and Lions Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Greg Anthony
* Pro Wrestling This Week
* Wrestler of the Week (March 22–28, 1987)
* Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
* Class of 2018
* Texas All-Star Wrestling
* TASW Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* Mid-South Wrestling Association/Universal Wrestling Federation
* Mid-South Louisiana Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* Mid-South North American Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* Mid-South/UWF World Tag Team Championship (2 times) – with Magnum T.A. (1) and Terry Taylor (1)
* World Championship Wrestling
* WCW World Television Championship (1 time)
* WCW United States Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
* World Wrestling Federation/WWE
* Royal Rumble (1988)
* WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2011)
* Slammy Award (2 times)
* Best Vocal Performance (1987)
* Greatest Hit (1987)
* Wrestling Observer Newsletter
* Most Improved (1982)
* Feud of the Year (1985)
* Most Unimproved (1989)
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* GFW profile
