
PHILIPPE PETIT
Philippe Petit (; born 13 August 1949) is a French high-wire artist who gained fame for his high-wire walk between the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in New York City, on the morning of August 7, 1974 as well as his high wire walk between the towers of Notre Dame cathedral in Paris, 1971. For his unauthorized feat above the ground – which he referred to as "le coup" – he rigged a cable and used a custom-made long, balancing pole. He performed for 45 minutes, making eight passes along the wire. The following week, he celebrated his 25th birthday. All charges were dismissed in exchange for him doing a performance in Central Park for children.
Since then, Petit has lived in New York, where he has been artist-in-residence at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, also a location of other aerial performances. He has done wire walking as part of official celebrations in New York, across the United States, and in France and other countries, as well as teaching workshops on the art. In 2008, Man on Wire, a documentary directed by James Marsh about Petit's walk between the towers, won numerous awards. He was also the subject of a children's book and an animated adaptation of it, released in 2005. The Walk, a movie based on Petit's walk, was released in September 2015, starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt as Petit and directed by Robert Zemeckis.
He also became adept at equestrianism, juggling, fencing, carpentry, rock-climbing, and bullfighting. Spurning circuses and their formulaic performances, he created his street persona on the sidewalks of Paris. In the early 1970s, he visited New York City, where he frequently juggled and worked on a slackline in Washington Square Park.
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life.
Petit was born in Nemours, Seine-et-Marne, France; his father Edmond Petit was an author and an Army pilot. At an early age, Petit discovered magic and juggling. He loved to climb, and at 16, he took his first steps on a tightrope wire. He told a reporter, 
Within one year, I taught myself to do all the things you could do on a wire. I learned the backward somersault, the front somersault, the unicycle, the bicycle, the chair on the wire, jumping through hoops. But I thought, "What is the big deal here? It looks almost ugly." So I started to discard those tricks and to reinvent my art.
In June 1971, Petit secretly installed a cable between the two towers of Notre Dame de Paris. On the morning of June 26, 1971, he "juggled balls" and "pranced back and forth" as the crowd below applauded.
WORLD TRADE CENTER WALK
Section::::World Trade Center walk.
Petit became known to New Yorkers in the early 1970s for his frequent tightrope-walking performances and magic shows in the city parks, especially Washington Square Park. Petit's most famous performance was in August 1974, conducted on a wire between the roofs of the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center in Manhattan, a quarter mile above the ground. The towers were still under construction and had not yet been fully occupied. He performed for 45 minutes, making eight passes along the wire, during which he walked, danced, lay down on the wire, and saluted watchers from a kneeling position. Office workers, construction crews and policemen cheered him on.
PLANNING
Section::::Planning.
Petit conceived his "coup" when he was 18, when he first read about the proposed construction of the Twin Towers and saw drawings of the project in a magazine, which he read in 1968 while sitting at a dentist's office. Petit was seized by the idea of performing there, and began collecting articles on the Towers whenever he could.
What was called the "artistic crime of the century" took Petit six years of planning. During this period, he learned everything he could about the buildings and their construction. In the same period, he began to perform high-wire walking at other famous places. Rigging his wire secretly, he performed as a combination of circus act and public display. In 1971, he performed his first such walk between the towers of the cathedral of Notre Dame de Paris, while priests were being ordained inside the building. In 1973, he walked a wire rigged between the two north pylons of the Sydney Harbour Bridge, in Sydney, Australia.
In planning for the Twin Towers walk, Petit had to learn how to accommodate such issues as the swaying of the high towers due to wind, which was part of their design; effects of wind and weather on the wire at that height, how to rig a steel cable across the gap between the towers (at a height of ), and how to gain entry with his collaborators, first to scope out the conditions and lastly, to stage the project. They had to get heavy equipment to the rooftops. He traveled to New York on numerous occasions to make first-hand observations.
Since the towers were still under construction, Petit and one of his collaborators, New York-based photographer Jim Moore, rented a helicopter to take aerial photographs of the buildings. Jean-François and Jean-Louis helped him practice in a field in France, and accompanied him to take part in the final rigging of the project, as well as to photograph it. Francis Brunn, a German juggler, provided financial support for the proposed project and its planning.
Petit and his crew gained entry into the towers several times and hid in upper floors and on the roofs of the unfinished buildings in order to study security measures. They also analyzed the construction and identified places to anchor the wire and cavalletti. Using his own observations, drawings, and Moore's photographs, Petit constructed a scale model of the towers in order to design the needed rigging for the wire walk.
Working from an ID of an American who worked in the building, Petit made fake identification cards for himself and his collaborators (claiming that they were contractors who were installing an electrified fence on the roof) to gain access to the buildings. Prior to this, Petit had carefully observed the clothes worn by construction workers and the kinds of tools they carried. He also took note of the clothing of office workers so that some of his collaborators could pose as white collar workers. He observed what time the workers arrived and left, so he could determine when he would have roof access.
As the target date of his "coup" approached, he claimed to be a journalist with Metropolis, a French architecture magazine, so that he could gain permission to interview the workers on the roof. The Port Authority allowed Petit to conduct the interviews, which he used as a pretext to make more observations. 
On the night of Tuesday, 6 August 1974, Petit and his crew had a lucky break and got a ride in a freight elevator to the 110th floor with their equipment. They stored it 19 steps below the roof. In order to pass the cable across the void, Petit and his crew had settled on using a bow and arrow attached to a rope. They had to practice this many times to perfect their technique. They first shot across a fishing line, which was attached to larger ropes, and finally to the 450-pound steel cable. The team was delayed when the heavy cable sank too fast, and had to be pulled up manually for hours. Petit had already identified points at which to anchor two tiranti (guy lines) to other points to stabilize the cable and keep the swaying of the wire to a minimum.
EVENT
Section::::Event.
Shortly after 7 am local time, Petit stepped out on the wire and started to perform. He was 1350 feet (411 m), a quarter mile, above the ground. He performed for 45 minutes, making eight passes along the wire, during which he walked, danced, lay down on the wire, and knelt to salute watchers. Crowds gathered on the streets below. He said later that he could hear their murmuring and cheers.
When NYPD and PAPD officers learned of his stunt, they came up to the roofs of both buildings to try to persuade him to get off the wire. They threatened to pluck him off by helicopter. Petit got off when it started to rain.
AFTERMATH
Section::::Aftermath.
There was extensive news coverage and public appreciation of Petit's high-wire walk; the district attorney dropped all formal charges of trespassing and other items relating to his walk. In exchange, Petit was required to give a free aerial show for children in Central Park. He performed on a high-wire walk in the Park above Belvedere Lake (known now as Turtle Pond).
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey gave Petit a lifetime pass to the Twin Towers' Observation Deck. He autographed a steel beam close to the point where he began his walk.
Petit's high-wire walk is credited with bringing the Twin Towers much needed attention and even affection, as they initially had been unpopular. Critics such as historian Lewis Mumford had regarded them as ugly and utilitarian in design, and too large a development for the area. The Port Authority was having trouble renting out all of the office space.
REPRESENTATION IN OTHER MEDIA
Section::::Representation in other media.
Mordicai Gerstein wrote and illustrated a children's book, The Man Who Walked Between The Towers (2003), which won a Caldecott Medal for his art. It was adapted and produced as an animated short film by the same title, directed by Michael Sporn and released in 2005, which won several awards.
The documentary film Man on Wire (2008) by UK director James Marsh is about Petit and his 1974 WTC performance. It won both the World Cinema Jury and Audience awards at the Sundance Film Festival 2008. It combines historical footage with re-enactment and has the spirit of a heist film. It won awards at the 2008 Full Frame Documentary Film Festival in Durham, North Carolina, and the Academy Award for Best Documentary in 2009. On stage with Marsh to accept the Oscar award, Petit made a coin vanish in his hands while thanking the Academy "for believing in magic". He balanced the Oscar by its head on his chin to cheers from the audience.
Petit's memoir was also adapted as a biographical drama entitled The Walk (2015), directed by Robert Zemeckis and starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt as Petit.
LATER LIFE
Section::::Later life.
Petit has made dozens of public high-wire performances in his career; in 1986 he re-enacted the crossing of the Niagara River by Blondin for an IMAX film. In 1989, to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the French Revolution, mayor Jacques Chirac invited him to walk an inclined wire strung from the ground at the Place du Trocadéro to the second level of the Eiffel Tower, crossing the Seine.
Petit briefly headlined with the Ringling Brothers Circus, but preferred staging his own performances. During his stint with the circus and a practice walk, he suffered his only fall, from , breaking several ribs. He says he has never fallen during a performance. "If I had, I wouldn't be here talking about it."
Petit regularly gives lectures and workshops internationally on a variety of topics and subjects. He single-handedly built a barn in the Catskill Mountains using the methods and tools of 18th-century timber framers. He wrote his eighth book, A Square Peg. He has also created an ebook for TED Books, entitled Cheating the Impossible: Ideas and Recipes from a Rebellious High-Wire Artist. Petit divides his time between New York City, where he is an artist in residence at the Cathedral of Saint John the Divine, and a hideaway in the Catskill Mountains.
Among those who have associated with some of his projects are such artists as: Mikhail Baryshnikov, Werner Herzog, Annie Leibovitz, Miloš Forman, Volker Schlöndorff, Twyla Tharp, Peter Beard, Marcel Marceau, Paul Auster, Paul Winter, Debra Winger, Robin Williams and Sting. 
Director James Signorelli assisted with creation of the book To Reach the Clouds (2002), about the Twin Towers walk. Petit not only wrote about his feat, and events that led to the performance, but also expressed his feelings following the September 11 attacks, during which the Twin Towers were destroyed. He wrote that on that morning, "My towers became our towers. I saw them collapse – hurling, crushing thousands of lives. Disbelief preceded sorrow for the obliteration of the buildings, perplexity descended before rage at the unbearable loss of life." Petit paid tribute to those who were killed and supported rebuilding the towers, promising that "When the towers again twin-tickle the clouds, I offer to walk again, to be the expression of the builders' collective voice. Together, we will rejoice in an aerial song of victory." A different complex of buildings has been developed on the site, and does not offer this opportunity.
LEGACY AND HONORS
* James Park Morton Interfaith Award
* Streb Action Maverick Award
* The Byrdcliffe Award
WORKS AND PERFORMANCES
MAJOR HIGH-WIRE PERFORMANCES
Vallauris, Alpes-Maritimes, France
performance for artist Pablo Picasso's 90th birthday
Notre Dame Cathedral
Notre Dame CathedralParis, France
staged walk between towers without permission
1973
Sydney Harbour Bridge
Sydney Harbour Bridge Sydney, Australia
staged walk between towers without permission
rowspan=31974
World Trade Center
World Trade CenterNew York City, New York, United States
staged walk between towers without permission
Central Park
Central ParkNew York City
Publicly authorized walk on inclined wire over Turtle Pond
Laon Cathedral
Laon CathedralLaon, France
performing on wire between the cathedral's two spires for an international television special
1975
Louisiana Superdome
Louisiana SuperdomeNew Orleans, Louisiana, United States
walk on wire across interior for the opening of the stadium
rowspan=21982
Cathedral of Saint John the Divine
Cathedral of Saint John the DivineNew York City, New York, United States
interior walk in height of nave to celebrate renewal of the cathedral's construction following a 40-year hiatus
Concert in the Sky
Denver, Colorado, United States
high-wire play directed and produced by Petit for the opening of the World Theatre Festival
rowspan=21983
Skysong
Purchase, New York, United States
high-wire play directed and produced by Petit for the opening of "Summerfare," the State University of New York Arts Festival
Centre Georges Pompidou
Centre Georges PompidouParis, France
rowspan=31984
Corde Raide-Piano Volant
Paris, France
high-wire play directed and produced by Petit with pop-music singer-songwriter Jacques Higelin
Paris Opera
Paris OperaParis, France
high-wire improvisation with opera singer Margherita Zimmermann
Museum of the City of New York
Museum of the City of New YorkNew York City, New York, United States
high-wire performance for the opening of the museum's Daring New York exhibit
rowspan=21986
Ascent
Cathedral of Saint John the DivineNew York City, New York, United States
concert for grand piano and high wire on an inclined cable above the nave of the cathedral
Lincoln Center
Lincoln CenterNew York City, New York, United States
high-wire performance for the reopening of the Statue of Liberty
rowspan=31987
Walking the Harp/A Bridge for Peace
Jerusalem, Israel
high-wire performance on an inclined cable linking the Jewish and Arab quarters for opening of Israel Festival under Jerusalemite Mayor Teddy Kollek
Moondancer
Portland Center for the Performing ArtsPortland, Oregon, United States
high-wire opera for the opening of the center
Grand Central Dances
Grand Central TerminalNew York City, New York, United States
high-wire choreography on wire set above the interior concourse of the terminal
1988
House of the Dead
Paris, France
creation of the role of the eagle in a production of From the House of the Dead (1930), an opera by Leoš Janáček, directed by Volker Schlöndorff
1989
Tour Eiffel
Paris, France
spectacular walk – for an audience of 250,000 – on an inclined cable linking the Palais de Chaillot with the second story of the Eiffel Tower, commemorating the French Bicentennial and anniversary of the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen, under Parisian Mayor Jacques Chirac
rowspan=21990
American Overture
American CenterParis, France
high-wire play for the ground-breaking ceremony of the center
Tokyo Walk
Tokyo, Japan
Japan's first high-wire performance, to celebrate the opening of the Plaza Mikado building in Tokyo's Akasaka district
1991
Viennalewalk
Vienna, Austria
high-wire performance evoking the history of cinema for the opening of the Vienna International Film Festival, directed by Werner Herzog
rowspan=31992
Namur
Namur, Belgium
inclined walk to the Citadel of Vauban for a telethon benefiting children with leukemia
Farinet Funambule!
Switzerland
high-wire walk portraying the 19th-century Robin Hood of the Alps culminated by harvesting the world's-smallest registered vineyard, to benefit abused children
The Monk's Secret Longing
Cathedral of Saint John the DivineNew York City, New York, United States
high-wire performance for the Regents' Dinner, at the centennial celebrations of the cathedral
1994
Historischer Hochseillauf
Frankfurt, Germany
historic high-wire walk on an inclined cable to celebrate the city's 1,200th anniversary, viewed by 500,000 spectators and the subject of a live, nationally broadcast television special
1995
Catenary Curve
New York City, New York, United States
performance during a conference on suspended structures, led by the architect Santiago Calatrava
rowspan=21996
ACT
New York City, New York, United States
medieval performance to celebrate the 25th anniversary of a New York City youth program
Crescendo
Cathedral of Saint John the DivineNew York City, New York, United States
theatrical, allegorical New Year's Eve performance on three different wires set in the nave of the cathedral as the farewell tribute to The Very Reverend James Parks Morton, Dean of the Cathedral, and his wife Pamela
1999
Millennium Countdown Walk
Rose Center for Earth and Space at the American Museum of Natural HistoryNew York City, New York, United States
Inauguration of the center
rowspan=32002
Arts on the High Wire January 11, 2002
Hammerstein BallroomNew York City, New York, United States
benefit performance for the New York Arts Recovery Fund on an inclined wire, with clown Bill Irwin and pianist Évelyne Crochet
Crystal Palace
Jacob K. Javits Convention CenterNew York City, New York, United States
Crossing Broadway
New York City, New York, United States
inclined walk, fourteen stories high, for the television talk show the Late Show with David Letterman (performed regularly since 1993)
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Philippe Petit, Trois Coups, (Paris: Herscher, 1983).
* Philippe Petit, Two towers, I walk, (New York: Reader's Digest, 1975), ASIN B00072LQRM
* Philippe Petit, On The High Wire, Preface by Marcel Marceau, Postface by Werner Herzog (New York: Random House, 1985).
* Philippe Petit, Funambule, (Paris: Albin Michel, 1991)
* Philippe Petit, Traité du funambulisme, Preface by Paul Auster, (Arles: Actus Sud, 1997), , (in French / en français)
* Philippe Petit, Über Mir Der Offene Himmel, (Stuttgart: Urachhaus, 1998)
* Philippe Petit, Trattato di Funambolismo, (Milano: Ponte Alle Grazie, 1999)
* Philippe Petit, To Reach The Clouds: My High Wire Walk Between The Twin Towers, (New York, North Point Press, 2002). ASIN B000UDX0JA,
* Philippe Petit, L'Art du Pickpocket, (Arles: Actes Sud, 2006)
* Philippe Petit, Alcanzar las nubes, (Alpha Decay, Barcelona, 2007)
* Philippe Petit, Man on Wire, (Skyhorse Publishing, New York, 2008)
* Philippe Petit, Why knot?: how to tie more than sixty ingenious, useful, beautiful, lifesaving, and secure knots!, (Abrams Image, New York, 2013)
* Philippe Petit, Creativity: The Perfect Crime, (Riverhead Hardcover, 2014)
FILMOGRAPHY
Blondin
Seventh Man Films for the IMAX System, directed by Kieth Merrill
1989
Tour et Fil
France
FR3/Totem Productions, directed by Alain Hattet
1991
Filmstunde
Austria
Werner Herzog Productions, directed by Werner Herzog
1993
Profile of Philippe Petit
Washington, D.C.
National Geographic Explorer Special
1994
The Man on the Wire
Germany
Documentary of the rigging and artistic preparations for Historischer Hochseillauf, Hessischer Rundfunk Television
1994
Historischer Hochseillauf
Germany
Live broadcast of the walk, Hessischer Rundfunk Television, directed by Sacha Arnz
1995
Mondo
France
Costa Gavras Productions, directed by Tony Gatlif
1995
Secrets of Lost Empires: The Incas
Peru
PBS/NOVA and BBC co-production, directed by Michael Barnes
2003
The Center of the World of New York City: A Documentary Film, Episode 8: People & Events: Philippe Petit (1948-)
New York City
PBS
2005
The Man Who Walked Between the Towers
USA
Michael Sporn Animation and Weston Woods Studios
2008
Man on Wire
UK
Wall to Wall/Red Box Films, directed by James Marsh, Academy Award winning documentary
2015
The Walk
US
3D biographical drama directed by Robert Zemeckis and starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt as Petit.
IN CULTURE
* The song, "Man on Wire" by the band 27 is a tribute to Philippe Petit.
* The song, "Sleepwalking," by Danish composer Ste van Holm is a tribute to Petit's World Trade Center walk.
* The Low Anthem's song, "Boeing 737", from their 2011 album Smart Flesh, refers to Petit's Twin Towers walk.
* American rock band Incubus used a photo of Petit as the cover art for their album, If Not Now, When? (2011).
* Colum McCann's National Book Award-winning novel, Let the Great World Spin (2009), features Petit's Twin Towers walk as its opening passage and a centrepiece to which numerous characters are connected.
* "Funambulist", a song by American metal band Cormorant, is about his walk between the Twin Towers.
* The song "Step Out Of The Void" by musician Howard Moss is a tribute to Philippe Petit, in the album Outside the Pale (2013).
* The song "Man On A Wire" by The Script on their fourth album, No Sound Without Silence, is influenced by Petit's high-wire legacy.
* The song "Stand Up Comedy" by U2 on their twelfth album, No Line On The Horizon, references "The wire is stretched in between our two towers".
* Petit was the inspiration for the 5th Anniversary 9/11 cover of The New Yorker magazine (Sep. 11, 2006), "Soaring Spirit", by John Mavroudis (concept) and Owen Smith (art). That cover was named Cover of the Year by the American Society of Magazine Editors (ASME). The two-part cover was a first for The New Yorker.
SEE ALSO
* Harry Gardiner
* Dan Goodwin
* Ivan Kristoff
* Owen Quinn
* Alain Robert
* The Flying Wallendas
* George Willig
REFERENCES
NOTES
FURTHER READING
* Mordicai Gerstein, The Man Who Walked Between the Towers (Roaring Brook Press, 2003)
* David Chelsea, 9-11: Artists Respond feature entitled "He Walks on Air 110 Stories High" (DC Comics, 2002)
* Ralph Keyes, Chancing It: Why We Take Risks (Little, Brown & Company, 1985)
* Angus K. Gillespie, Twin Towers: the Life of New York City's World Trade Center (Rutgers University Press, 1999)
* James Glanz and Eric Lipton, City in the Sky (New York: Times Book, 2003)
* Colum McCann, Let the Great World Spin (New York: Random House, 2009)
ARTICLES AND INTERVIEWS
* Rosenthal, Adam (1 September 2012). "Suspended Reading: Man on Wire, 9/11 and the Logic of the High-Wire." Screening the Past.
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Columbia Artists Management Inc. — Philippe Petit
* MSA - The Man Who Walked Between The Towers. Co-produced by Michael Sporn Animation and Weston Woods Studios
* Philippe Petit Signature visible in the 1980s
* photos of Philippe Petit crossing the Twin Towers along with others
* Philippe Petit: The journey across the high wire, TED2012, Filmed Mar 2012, Posted May 2012.
