
1999 STANLEY CUP FINALS
The 1999 Stanley Cup Finals was the championship series of the National Hockey League's (NHL) 1998–99 season, and the culmination of the 1999 Stanley Cup playoffs. It was contested by the Eastern Conference champion Buffalo Sabres and the Western Conference champion Dallas Stars. It was the 106th year of the Stanley Cup being contested. The Sabres were led by captain Michael Peca, coach Lindy Ruff and goalie Dominik Hasek. The Stars were led by captain Derian Hatcher, coach Ken Hitchcock and goalie Ed Belfour. It was the Sabres' second Stanley Cup Final appearance, the first being a loss to Philadelphia in 1975. It was the third appearance for the Stars' franchise, and their first since moving to Dallas from Minnesota in 1993. Minnesota (known at the time as the North Stars) lost in the Final to the NY Islanders in 1981 and to Pittsburgh in 1991. The Stars defeated the Sabres four games to two to win their first Stanley Cup, becoming the eighth post-1967 expansion team to earn a championship, and the first Southern team to win the Cup. This was the first time since 1994 that the Stanley Cup Finals did not end in a sweep.
This series is also remembered because of the controversial finish to game six, in which Stars forward Brett Hull scored the Cup-winning goal with his skate in the crease, which was against the rules at the time. The league allowed the goal to stand as it was ruled that Hull was turned into the crease while maintaining continuous possession. 1999 was the only year between 1995 and 2003 that neither the New Jersey Devils, the Colorado Avalanche or the Detroit Red Wings won the Stanley Cup.
PATHS TO THE FINALS
Section::::Paths to the Finals.
Buffalo defeated the Ottawa Senators 4-0, the Boston Bruins 4-2 and Toronto Maple Leafs 4-1 to make it to the final.
Dallas defeated the Edmonton Oilers 4-0, the St. Louis Blues 4-2 and the Colorado Avalanche 4-3 to advance to the final.
GAME SUMMARIES
GAME ONE
Section::::Game summaries.
Section::::Game one.
The opening game was in Dallas and it was the visiting Buffalo Sabres who struck first, winning 3–2 in overtime. Dallas led 1-0 on a power play goal by Brett Hull, but Stu Barnes and Wayne Primeau scored 5:04 apart in the third to give Buffalo a 2-1 lead. Jere Lehtinen tied the game in the final minute of the third period, but Jason Woolley scored at 15:30 of overtime to give the Sabres the series lead.
GAME TWO
Section::::Game two.
Dallas struck back in the second game, winning 4–2. Dallas attempted to rattle Buffalo goaltender Dominik Hasek in the first period, as Brian Skrudland was assessed a charging minor after running Hasek, who had gone into the corner to his right to play the puck, at 12:25 of the first period. With three seconds left in the period, Dallas center Mike Modano tripped Hasek away from the play in almost the same spot, and a number of scrums broke out as time expired. Dallas winger Joe Nieuwendyk—who had been "freight-trained" (in the words of Fox play-by-play man Mike Emrick) into the boards by Buffalo center Brian Holzinger with seven seconds left in one of a series of big hits—dropped the gloves and fought Holzinger in the circle to the right of Hasek. These were the first fighting majors in three years in the final round, and it was also Nieuwendyk's first fighting major in five years in either the playoffs or regular season. Nieuwendyk's decision to drop the gloves—so out-of-character for him—seemed to inspire the team and was one of the reasons he eventually won the Conn Smythe Trophy in 1999.
After the scoreless opening period, the teams traded goals in the middle frame. Craig Ludwig's first goal in 102 playoff games gave Dallas its first lead of the game in the third period, but Alexei Zhitnik tied it 71 seconds later. Brett Hull scored on a slap shot, a one-timer on a pass from Tony Hrkac, from the top of the circle to Hasek's left with 2:50 remaining in the game, but Buffalo had an excellent chance to tie the game with Derian Hatcher being assessed a high-sticking minor 19 seconds later. During the power play, Buffalo pulled Hasek for a 6-on-4 attacking advantage, but the Stars were able to kill the penalty, and Hatcher scored an empty-netter just three seconds after emerging from the penalty box. The empty net goal sealed the win for Dallas, and evened the series at one game apiece. Mike Modano left the game with approximately ten minutes to play after suffering a broken wrist.
GAME THREE
Section::::Game three.
The series shifted to Buffalo for games three and four. It was the visiting Dallas Stars turn to win one on the road, winning 2–1. With Modano hampered by his wrist injury, and Hull leaving the game with a groin injury, Joe Nieuwendyk's two goals, including his sixth game-winner of the playoffs, led Dallas to the win.
GAME FOUR
Section::::Game four.
Facing a two games to one deficit in the series, the Sabres came through with a 2–1 victory.
GAME FIVE
Section::::Game five.
With the series tied at two games apiece and returning to Dallas, Ed Belfour made 23 saves to shut out the Sabres, and move Dallas within one win of the Stanley Cup.
GAME SIX
Section::::Game six.
The series shifted back to Marine Midland Arena for the sixth game on June 19, 1999, where the Dallas Stars would seek their first Stanley Cup, while the Buffalo Sabres would fight for a win to extend the series to a seventh and final game.
Dallas, which allowed the first goal in the earlier two games played at Marine Midland Arena, took a 1-0 lead on one of its few scoring chances in the first period when Lehtinen scored his tenth goal of the playoffs at 8:09. The Sabres tied the game with their first goal since the third period of game four when Barnes' wrist shot eluded Belfour with 1:39 to play in the second period.
The game remained tied at one through the third period and the first two overtime periods, despite several chances by both teams to score. At 14:51 of the third overtime period, Brett Hull scored off of a rebound from inside the crease over a sprawling Dominik Hasek to end the series and award Dallas their first Stanley Cup.
It was the longest Cup-winning game in Finals history, and the second-longest Finals game overall, after game one of the 1990 Stanley Cup Finals, which ended at 15:13 of the third overtime.
"NO GOAL"
Section::::"No Goal".
Brett Hull's goal ended the series and the Stars were awarded the Stanley Cup. The referees did not seek a review from the video judge, although NHL officials said that they reviewed the tape several times. They subsequently told the incensed Buffalo Coach Lindy Ruff that although Hull's left skate preceded the puck into the crease, Hull had continuous possession and the goal was legal. "The rule was absolutely, correctly applied," NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman said. "It was a nonissue. Everyone understands it was the right call." NHL Director of Officiating Bryan Lewis said there was no crease violation because "Hull had possession of the puck when his skate entered the crease." Coincidentally, Hasek and Hull would become teammates on the Detroit Red Wings Stanley Cup winning team in 2002.
In years since, Buffalo fans have often cited this even as the "No Goal game".
This is the only time Dallas has won the Stanley Cup, while Buffalo has not returned to the Finals since this series. Dallas returned to the Finals in 2000 but lost to the New Jersey Devils.
BROADCASTING
Section::::Broadcasting.
In Canada, the series was televised on CBC. In the United States, this was fifth and final year in which coverage of the Cup Finals was split between Fox and ESPN. Fox aired games one, two, and five; while ESPN had games three, four, and six. Had there been a game seven, it would have aired on Fox. Under the U.S. TV contracts that would take effect beginning next season, ABC would take over for Fox as the NHL's network television partner.
DALLAS STARS – 1999 STANLEY CUP CHAMPIONS
SEE ALSO
* 1998–99 NHL season
* 1999 Stanley Cup playoffs
* List of Stanley Cup champions
* National Hockey League lore
REFERENCES
SOURCES
* List of Stanley Cup Finals broadcasters
EXTERNAL LINKS
* NHL / Stanley Cup Finals—Hull Gives New Life To Stars 
* but kitchen sink thrown at Hasek in Game 2
* Hull Has A Blast For Stars
