
ROMAINE LETTUCE
Romaine or cos lettuce (Lactuca sativa L. var. longifolia) is a variety of lettuce that grows in a tall head of sturdy dark green leaves with firm ribs down their centers. Unlike most lettuces, it is tolerant of heat. In North America, romaine is sold as whole heads or as "hearts" that have had the outer leaves removed and are often packaged together. , commercially sold romaine lettuce is the subject of warnings by U.S. and Canadian health authorities that it should not be consumed in any form, at home or in restaurants, by humans due to contamination with E.coli bacteria.
ORIGIN AND ETYMOLOGY
Section::::Origin and etymology.
In British English, it is commonly known as "cos" lettuce, and in North America as "romaine" lettuce. Many dictionaries trace the word cos to the name of the Greek island of Cos, from which the lettuce was presumably introduced. Other authorities trace cos to the Arabic word for lettuce, .
It apparently reached Western Europe via Rome, as in Italian it is called lattuga romana and in French , both meaning "Roman lettuce". Hence the name "romaine", the common term in North American English.
RITUAL USE
Section::::Ritual use.
For 3000 years (from at least 2700 BC), lettuce was associated with the ancient Egyptian god of fertility, Min, for its resemblance to the phallus.
Romaine lettuce may be used in the Passover Seder as a type of bitter herb. It symbolises the bitterness inflicted by the Egyptians while the Israelites were slaves in Egypt.
CUISINE
Section::::Cuisine.
Romaine is a common salad green, and is the usual lettuce used in Caesar salad. Romaine lettuce is commonly used in Middle Eastern cuisine. Romaine, like other lettuces, may also be cooked. For example, it can be braised or made into soup. The thick ribs, especially on the older outer leaves, should have a milky fluid that gives the romaine its typically bitter herb taste.
In North American supermarkets, romaine is widely available year-round.
NUTRITION
Section::::Nutrition.
As with other dark leafy greens, the antioxidants found in romaine lettuce are believed to help prevent cancer.
FOOD SAFETY ISSUES
Section::::Food safety issues.
From November 2017 through January 2018, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHA) identified romaine as being linked to illness in 41 persons in Canada. A probably related outbreak affected 25 people in 15 states of the U.S. who ate leafy greens, but the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) were unable to confirm that it was romaine in particular. There was one death. The disease agent was Shiga toxin-producing . The most recent illness started on December 12, 2017; the PHA declared the outbreak over on January 10, 2018, and the CDC declared it over on January 25.
In response to another E. coli O157:H7 outbreak, which probably began in mid-March 2018, the CDC recommended in April 2018 that consumers not buy or eat romaine lettuce unless they could confirm it was not from the Yuma, Arizona, growing region. On May 22, 2018, after a month-long warning, the CDC announced it was now safe to consume romaine again. The outbreak killed five people and caused 89 hospitalizations across 32 states.
In June 2018, the FDA traced the source of the latest E. coli outbreak to water from a canal located in Yuma, Arizona.
In November 2018, the US CDC and the PHA of Canada issued a warning to consumers that romaine lettuce should not be consumed in any form, and that they should dispose of any currently on hand. The same strain of E. coli identified in the 2017-2018 outbreak was implicated. At least 43 people became ill in this outbreak, which the FDA traced to one of six counties in Central California: Monterey, San Benito, San Luis Obispo, Santa Barbara, Santa Cruz and Ventura.
GROWERS
Section::::Growers.
Many US growers of romaine lettuce farm in Salinas in the summer and the Imperial Valley and Yuma in the winter, relying on day laborers crossing the border from Mexico.
OTHER TRIVIA
Section::::Other trivia.
The day of 22 Germinal in the French Republican Calendar was dedicated to this lettuce, as "".
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Kirschmann, John D. & Dunne, Lavon J. Nutrition Almanac, s.v. .
EXTERNAL LINKS
