
SPANISH ORTHOGRAPHY
Spanish orthography is the orthography used in the Spanish language. The alphabet uses the Latin script. The spelling is fairly phonemic, especially in comparison to more opaque orthographies like English and Irish, having a relatively consistent mapping of graphemes to phonemes; in other words, the pronunciation of a given Spanish-language word can largely be predicted from its spelling and to a slightly lesser extent vice versa. Notable features of Spanish punctuation include the lack of the serial comma and the inverted question and exclamation marks: .
Spanish uses capital letters much less often than English; they are not used on adjectives derived from proper nouns (e.g. francés, español, israelí from Francia, España, and Israel, respectively) and book titles capitalize only the first word (e.g. La rebelión de las masas).
Spanish uses only the acute accent, over any vowel: . This accent is used to mark the tonic (stressed) syllable, though it may also be used occasionally to distinguish homophones such as si ('if') and sí ('yes'). The only other diacritics used are the tilde on the letter , which is considered a separate letter from , and the diaeresis used in the sequences and —as in bilingüe ('bilingual')—to indicate that the is pronounced, , rather than having the usual silent role that it plays in unmarked and .
In contrast with English, Spanish has an official body that governs linguistic rules, orthography among them: the Royal Spanish Academy, which makes periodic changes to orthography. It is the policy of the Royal Spanish Academy that, when quoting older texts, one should update spelling to the current rules, except in discussions of the history of the Spanish language.
ALPHABET IN SPANISH
Section::::Alphabet in Spanish.
The Spanish language is written using the Spanish alphabet, which is the Latin script with one additional letter: eñe "ñ", for a total of 27 letters. Although the letters "k" and "w" are part of the alphabet, they appear only in loanwords such as ', ', ' and ' (tungsten). Each letter has a single official name according to the Real Academia EspañolaA  width=100  B  width=100  C  width=100  D  width=100  E  width=100  F  width=100  G  width=100  H  width=100  IPhonemeJKLMNÑOPQRSTUVWXYZSpanish phonology and .
When acute accent and diaeresis marks are used on vowels (, , , , and ) they are considered variants of the plain vowel letters, but is considered a separate letter from . This makes a difference when sorting alphabetically: appears in dictionaries after . For example, in a Spanish dictionary ' comes after '.
There are five digraphs: ("che" or "ce hache"), ("elle" or "doble ele"), ("doble erre"), ("ge u") and ("cu u"). While che and elle were formerly treated each as a single letter, in 1994 the tenth congress of the Association of Spanish Language Academies, by request of UNESCO and other international organizations, agreed to alphabetize and as ordinary sequences of letters. Thus, for example, in dictionaries, chico is alphabetized after centro and before ciudad, instead of being alphabetized after all words beginning with cu- as was formerly done. Despite their former status as unitary letters of the alphabet, and have always been treated as sequences with regard to the rules of capitalization. Thus the word ' in a text written in all caps is CHILLÓN, not *ChILlÓN, and if it is the first word of a sentence, it is written Chillón, not *CHillón. Sometimes, one finds lifts with buttons marked ', but this double capitalization has always been incorrect according to RAE rules.
This is the list of letters from most to least frequent in Spanish texts: ; the vowels take around 45% of the text.
ALTERNATIVE NAMES
B and V
R
W
I
Y
Z
OTHER CHARACTERS
Section::::Other characters.
Besides the letters, other characters are specially associated with Spanish-language texts:
* The currency symbols of Spanish-language countries: (centavo), (colón), (peseta, (peso), (Paraguayan guaraní)
* , abbreviation of cada una ('each one')
* and are used in abbreviations like 1º, 1ª ('first') or Dª ("doña"). Nº (número, 'number') can be represented as one character .
* is the symbol of the arroba, a pre-metric unit of weight.
* and are used at the beginning of interrogative and exclamatory sentences, respectively.
ORTHOGRAPHY
Section::::Orthography.
Spanish orthography is such that the pronunciation of most words is unambiguous given their written form; the main exception is the letter , which usually represents or , but can also represent or , especially in proper nouns from times of Old Spanish, as in or Pedro Ximénez (both ). These orthographic rules are similar to, but not the same as, those of other Romance languages of the Iberian Peninsula, such as Portuguese, Catalan and Galician.
The converse does not always hold, i.e. for a given pronunciation there may be multiple possible spellings. The main issues are:
* the use of both and for ;
* the use of both and for before and ;
* the silent ;
* for the speakers who have merged and , the various use of , or in different words;
* the use of , or before a vowel for (although many speakers distinguish some or all of these combinations);
* for speakers not in central and northern Spain, the use of and for ;
* the occasional use of accents to distinguish two words that sound the same, such as tú and tu, sí and si, and más and mas.
+ Use of different letters for the same sound
! sound !! before !! elsewhere
CONSONANTS
Section::::Consonants.
+ Consonants
! Letter !! Context !! !! Examples !! English approximation
same as the English voiceless ⟨th⟩ (as in thing) in central and northern Spain, or the typical English (as in sass) in all other regions
same as certain instances of English or ; e.g. skull, scan, or picking (unaspirated, i.e. without the puff of air that accompanies English at the beginning of a word, e.g. in can)
before voiced consonants
a sound between a light English and the typical English (between gold and ahold)
same as the typical English ; church
practically the same as the typical English , except that it is fully voiced and the tip of the tongue touches the upper teeth; e.g. adore
same as the typical English voiced ⟨th⟩; e.g. this
same as the typical English ; e.g. face
similar to a "strong" English -sound (e.g. the in Scottish loch or in German Bach) or aspirated (as in heaven)
practically the same as the typical English sound, except that it is fully voiced; e.g. ago
not before or , and not in the above contexts
a sound between a light English and the typical English (between gold and ahold)
a sound like the in English penguin
similar to the typical English , but preceded by a soft guttural sound
before or , and either word-initial after a pause, or after 
practically the same as the typical English sound, except that it is fully voicedclear of British English, rather than the dark of American English);e.g. lull
similar to the in English million (in some dialects simplified to a sound between the typical English and , e.g. between yes and Jess)
same as the typical English ; madam
same as the typical English ; e.g. nun
same as the typical English ; madamsame as the English in symphonysame as the typical English (as in )same as the English in canyonsame as the typical English (as in sink or sing)
roughly like canyon
same as certain instances of English ; e.g. span or typing (unaspirated, i.e. without the puff of air that accompanies English at the beginning of a word, e.g. in pan)
same as certain instances of English or ; e.g. skull, scan, or picking (unaspirated, i.e. without the puff of air that accompanies English at the beginning of a word, e.g. in can)
; ; ; invierno; persona; verde; ; amor puro
trilled or rolled 
; ; ; ; ; ; invierno; persona; verde; ; amor puro; amor eterno
flapped ; e.g. the same sound as the of ladder or of latter in American English
trilled or rolled 
same as the typical English ; e.g. the in is or busy; in central and northern Spain, Paisa region of Colombia, and Andes, this sound is made with the tip of the tongue rather than the blade, with a sound quality intermediate between the alveolar of English busy and the palato-alveolar of pleasure
everywhere else
same as the typical English ; sass; in central and northern Spain, Paisa region of Colombia, and Andes, this sound is made with the tip of the tongue rather than the blade, with a sound quality intermediate between the alveolar of English sea and the palato-alveolar of she
Áncash; Shanghái; shiitake, , Washington
same as the typical English ;e.g. sheesh; when this digraph is equated with the phoneme (typically in northern and central Spain, Paisa region of Colombia, and Andes), the sound is made with the tip of the tongue rather than the blade, with a sound quality intermediate between the alveolar of English sea and the palato-alveolar of she
same as certain instances of English ; e.g. stand (unaspirated, i.e. without the puff of air that accompanies English at the beginning of a word, e.g. in tan). Also, the tip of the tongue touches the upper teeth, rather than the alveolar ridgevoiced ⟨th⟩; e.g. this 
similar to the combined sound in English cat-like
tx
same as "ch".
tz
same as the "ts" in English "cats
when (sometimes turn to /gw/ or /bw/)
same as the typical English ; e.g. bib
same as the typical English ; e.g. taxi
same as the typical English ; sass; in central and northern Spain, Paisa region of Colombia, and Andes, this sound is made with the tip of the tongue rather than the blade, with a sound quality intermediate between the alveolar of English sea and the palato-alveolar of she
before a consonant
same as the typical English or ; e.g. max or mass
; xiote; Texas; La Axarquía; Ximena; Ximénez; Mexía
similar to a "strong" English -sound (e.g. the in Scottish loch or in German Bach) or aspirated (as in heaven)
Xela; xocoyote
same as the typical English ; e.g. sheesh; when this is equated with the phoneme (typically in northern and central Spain, Paisa region of Colombia, and Andes), the sound is made with the tip of the tongue rather than the blade, with a sound quality intermediate between the alveolar of English sea and the palato-alveolar of she
similar to the typical English , or but softer; e.g. similar to yes or Jess
same as the English voiceless ⟨th⟩ (as in thing) in central and northern Spain, or the typical English (as in sass) in all other regions
same as the typical English voiced ⟨th⟩; e.g. this in central and northern Spain,or the typical English ; e.g. the in is or busy; 
* Orthographic  in names of Visigothic origin is thought to have been pronounced [] in Old Spanish (in which /b/ and // are separate phonemes); // is also spelled  in Old Spanish. See History of Spanish#Merger of /b/ and /v/.* 
The only consonant letters that can be doubled in the Spanish orthography are "l", "r" (as the digraphs "ll" and "rr"), "c" (only when the two "c"s have different sounds: acción, diccionario), "n" (e.g. innato, perenne, connotar, dígannos), and "b" (in a few words with the prefix sub-: subbase, subbético). Exceptions are gamma (and its derivatives gammaglobulina, gammagrafía), digamma, kappa, atto-, as well as unadapted foreign words (including proper names) and their derivations (see below).
VOWELS
Section::::Vowels.
+ Vowels
! Letter
! Examples !! English approximation
rowspan="2"see
y
+ Semivowels
! !! Spelling !! Examples !! English approximation
you
wine
THE LETTER Y
Section::::The letter Y.
The letter "y" is consistently used in the consonantal value. The use of the letter "y" for a vowel or a semivowel is very restricted. The diphthongs ai, ei, oi, ui are usually written ay, ey, oy, uy at the end of words (e. g. hay, ley, voy, muy), though exceptions may occur in loanwords (e.g. bonsái, agnusdéi). The letter y is conserved in rarely used encliticized verbal forms like doyte, haylas (it is more normal to say te doy, las hay). The letter "y" is used for the vowel in the conjunction y and in some acronyms, like pyme (from pequeña y mediana empresa). Otherwise, "y" for a vowel or semivowel occurs only in some archaically-spelled proper names and their derivations: Guaymas, guaymeño, and also fraybentino (from Fray Bentos with regular usage of "y" in a word-final diphthong). Derivatives of foreign proper names also conserve "y": taylorismo, from Taylor.
SPECIAL AND MODIFIED LETTERS
Section::::Special and modified letters.
The vowels can be marked with an acute accent—á, é, í, ó, ú, ý—for two purposes: to mark stress if it does not follow the most common pattern, or to differentiate words that are otherwise spelled identically (called the tilde diacrítica in Spanish). The accented "y" is found only in some proper names: Aýna, Laýna, Ýñiguez.
A silent "u" is used between "g" and "e" or "i" to indicate a hard "g" pronunciation, so that "gue" represents and "gui" represents . The letter "ü" ("u" with diaeresis) is used in this context to indicate that the "u" is not silent, e.g. ' /pinˈgwino/. The diaeresis may occur also in Spanish poetry, occasionally, over either vowel of a diphthong, to indicate an irregular disyllabic pronunciation required by the meter (', to be pronounced as three syllables). This is analogous to the use of "ï" in naïve in English.
Also a silent "u" always follows a "q" when followed by "e" or "i", as in ', ', but there is no case for the combination "qü", with "cu" fulfilling this role (as in '). There are no native words in Spanish with the combination "qua" nor "quo"; again, "cu" is used instead ('). When they appear, usually from Latin idioms such as ', the "u" is always pronounced, so "ü" is never needed after "q". Prior to the introduction of the 2010 Common Orthography words such as ' ('quorum'), ' ('quasar') or ' ('Qatar') were spelled with "q"; this is no longer so.
KEYBOARD REQUIREMENTS
Section::::Keyboard requirements.
To write Spanish on a typewriter or to set type, the special characters required are á, é, í, ó, ú, ñ, Ñ, ü, Ü, ¿, and ¡. The uppercase Á, É, Í, Ó, and Ú are also prescribed by the RAE, although occasionally dispensed with in practice.
As implemented on the mechanical typewriter, the keyboard contained a single dead key, with the acute accent in the lowercase position, and the diaeresis in the uppercase position. With these, one could write á, é, í, ó, ú, and ü. A separate key provided ñ/Ñ. (A dead key "~" is used on the Spanish and Portuguese keyboards, but on the Latin American keyboard the "~" is not a dead key). The inverted marks "¿" and "¡" completed the required minimum. When an additional key was added to electro-mechanical typewriters, this was used for "ª" and "º", though these are not required. (They are somewhat archaic ordinal abbreviations: "1º" for primero, "2ª" for segunda, etc.)
As implemented in the MS-DOS operating system and its successor Microsoft Windows, a ç/Ç pair—not required in Spanish but needed for Catalan, Portuguese, and French—is typically added, and the use of the acute accent and diaeresis with capital letters (Á, É, Í, Ó, Ú, Ü) is supported. Although not needed for Spanish, another dead key with "`" (the grave accent) in lowercase position and "^" (the circumflex accent) in uppercase position was included. Also available is "·" (the "flying point", required in Catalan). To make room for these characters not on the standard English keyboard, characters used primarily in programming, science, and mathematics—"[" and "]", "{" and "}", "/" and "\", "", and ""—are removed, requiring special keystroke sequences to access.
STRESS AND ACCENTUATION
Section::::Stress and accentuation.
Stress in Spanish is marked unequivocally through a series of orthographic rules. The default stress is on the penultimate (next-to-last) syllable on words that end in a vowel, or and on the final syllable when the word ends in any consonant other than or . Words that do not follow the default stress have an acute accent over the stressed vowel. The written accent will thus appear only in certain forms of a word and not others, for example andén, plural andenes. In many cases the accent is essential to understanding what a word means, for example hablo (I speak) as opposed to habló (he/she/Ud. spoke).
For purposes of counting syllables and assigning stress in Spanish, where an unmarked high vowel is followed by another vowel the sequence is treated as a rising diphthong, counted as a single syllable—unlike Portuguese and Catalan, which tend to treat such a sequence as two syllables. A syllable is of the form XAXX, where X represents a consonant, permissible consonant cluster, or no sound at all, and A represents a vowel, diphthong, or triphthong. A diphthong is any sequence of an unstressed high vowel ( or ) with another vowel (as in or ). And a triphthong is any combination of three vowels beginning and ending with unstressed high vowels (as in or ). Hence Spanish writes (no accent), while Portuguese and Catalan both put an accent mark on (all three languages stress the first ). The letter is not considered an interruption between vowels (so that is considered to have two syllables: ahu-mar; this may vary in some regions, where is used as a hiatus or diphthong-broking mark for unstressed vowels, so the pronunciation would be then a-hu-mar, though that trait is gradually disappearing).
An accent over the high vowel ( or ) of a vowel sequence prevents it from being a diphthong (i.e., it signals a hiatus): for example, and have two syllables each.
A word with final stress is called oxytone (or in traditional Spanish grammar texts); a word with penultimate stress is called paroxytone ( or ); a word with antepenultimate stress (stress on the third-to-last syllable) is called proparoxytone (). A word with preantepenultimate stress (on the fourth last syllable) or earlier does not have a common linguistic term in English, but in Spanish receives the name . (Spanish words can be stressed only on one of the last three syllables, except in the case of a verb form with enclitic pronouns, such as .) All proparoxytones and sobresdrújulas have a written accent mark.
Adjectives spelled with a written accent (such as , , ) keep the written accent when they are made into adverbs with the -mente ending (thus , , ), and do not gain any if they do not have one (thus from ). In the pronunciation of these adverbs—as with all adverbs in —primary stress is on the ending, on the penultimate syllable. The original stress of the adjective—whether marked, as in fácilmente, or not marked, as in libremente—may be manifested as a secondary stress in the adverb.
ACCENTUATION OF CAPITAL LETTERS
Section::::Accentuation of capital letters.
The Real Academia Española indicates that accents are required on capitals (but not when the capitals are used in acronyms).
DIFFERENTIAL ACCENTS
Section::::Differential accents.
In a number of cases, homonyms are distinguished with written accents on the stressed (or only) syllable: for example, (informal object case of 'you') vs. ('tea'); (third person reflexive) vs. ('I know' or imperative 'be'); (informal 'your') vs. (informal subject case of 'you'). When relative and interrogative pronouns have the same letters (as is often the case), the interrogative pronoun is accented and the relative pronoun is not:
The use of is poetic for the vocative: The use of for the word (meaning 'or') is a hypercorrection. Up until 2010, was used when applied to numbers: ('7 or 9'), to avoid possible confusion with the digit 0. The tenth congress of the Association of Spanish Language Academies deemed the use of an accent unnecessary, as typewriting eliminates possible confusion due to the different shapes of (zero) and (the letter).
These diacritics are often called or in traditional Spanish grammar.
FOREIGN WORDS
Section::::Foreign words.
Loanwords in Spanish are usually written according to Spanish spelling conventions (extranjerismos adaptados): e.g. pádel, fútbol, chófer, máster, cederrón ('CD-ROM'). However, some foreign words (extranjerismos crudos) are used in Spanish texts in their original forms, not conforming to Spanish orthographic conventions: e.g. ballet, blues, jazz, jeep, lady, pizza, sheriff, software. The RAE prescribes extranjerismos crudos to be written in italics in a text printed in roman type, and vice versa, and in quotation marks in a manuscript text or when italics are not available:
In practice, this RAE prescription is not always followed.
This typographical emphasis is not used for foreign proper names and their derivations; nor is it used for some Spanish derivations of extranjerismos crudos, such as pizzería.
CAPITALIZATION
Section::::Capitalization.
Capitalization in Spanish is sparse compared to English. In general, only personal and place names, some abbreviations (e.g. Sr. López, but López); the first word (only) in the title of a book, movie, song, etc. (except when the title contains only two words, then the second word is also sometimes capitalized); and the first word in a sentence are capitalized, as are names of companies, government bodies, etc. Names of nationalities or languages are not capitalized, nor (in standard style) are days of the week and months of the year.
OLDER CONVENTIONS
Section::::Older conventions.
The Spanish Royal Academy has reformed the orthographic rules of Spanish many times.
In Old Spanish, was used to represent the voiceless palatal sound (as in ' 'he/she said'), while represented the voiced palatal (as in ' 'son'). With the changes of sibilants in the 16th century, the two sounds merged as (later to become velar ), and the letter was chosen for the single resulting phoneme in 1815. When Cervantes wrote Don Quixote he spelled the name in the old way (and English preserves the ), but modern editions in Spanish spell it with . For the use of in Mexico—and in the name México itself—see below.
The letter (c-cedilla)—which was first used in Old Spanish—is now obsolete in Spanish, having merged with in a process similar to that of and . Old Spanish ', ', ' became modern ', ', '.
Words formerly spelled with or (such as ', ', and ') are now written with and (', ', ', respectively). The sequences and do not occur in modern Spanish except some loanwords: ', ', ; some borrowed words have double spellings: /.
The old spellings with , , and remained in use until the eighteenth century. They were replaced by , , and , respectively in 1726. and continued to be used in some words due to their etymology (e.g. ', '), but this usage was largely reduced during the 1860—1880s, so these words became ' and '. The letter was replaced by in 1815, although word-final remained until 1832 (e.g. ', now '). The combinations and were originally used only in a few etymological cases (e.g. ', ') and also in diminutives ('); after the reform of 1815, and were replaced by and in the Ortografía but by and in the Diccionario; since 1832, the spelling was firmly established to be and . Also, unetymological spellings with , (that is, words that did not have g in Latin) were changed to , (e.g. ', from Latin ', became ').
Old Spanish used to distinguish /s/ and /z/ between vowels, and it distinguished them by using for the former and for the latter, e.g. ' ('bear') and ' ('I dare to'). In orthography, the distinction was suppressed in 1763.
Words spelled in modern Spanish with , (e.g. ', ', ) were written with , up until 1815.
In 1726, most double consonants were simplified (e.g. → , → )—but the of a prefix before the of a root was differentiated to in 1763 (e.g. " → "). And the Graeco-Latin digraphs , , and were reduced to , , and , respectively (e.g. → , → , → , → ).
An earlier usage had Y as a word initial I.
It is only maintained in the archaic spelling of proper names like Yglesias or Ybarra.
In early printing, the long s was a different version of used at the beginning or in the middle of a word.
In Spain, the change to use a round s everywhere as in the current usage was mainly accomplished between the years 1760 and 1766; for example, the multi-volume España Sagrada made the switch with volume 16 (1762). 
From 1741 to 1815, the circumflex was used over vowels to indicate that preceding and should be pronounced /k/ and /ks/ respectively and not /tʃ/ and /x/, e.g. , .
The use of accent marks in publishing varies with different historical periods, due mainly to reforms promulgated by the Spanish Royal Academy. For example, many of the words that are today standardly written with an accent mark appeared more often without it up until around 1880. These include words with final stress ending in -n (e.g. ', ', ', ', '—but not future-tense verb forms like ', '); verbs in the imperfect tense (e.g. ', '); the possessives mío and mía; and the word '. Meanwhile, one-letter words other than the conjunction y—namely the preposition a and the conjunctions e (the form of y before an [i] sound), o, and u (form of o before [o])—are generally written with accent marks from the mid-1700s to 1911. The accent-marked infinitive ' begins to outnumber the unaccented form around 1920. Monosyllabic preterit verb forms such as ' and were usually written with accent marks before the 1950s.
The names of numbers in the upper teens and the twenties were originally written as three words (e.g. , y ), but nowadays they have come to be spelled predominantly as a single word (e.g. ', '). For the numbers from 21 to 29, the "fused" forms emerged over the second half of the 19th century. For those from 16 to 19, the one-word forms took the lead in the 1940s. Fusing of number-names above 30 (e.g. ', ') is rare.
REFORM PROPOSALS
Section::::Reform proposals.
In spite of the relatively regular orthography of Spanish, there have been several initiatives to simplify it further. Andrés Bello succeeded in making his proposal official in several South American countries, but they later returned to the standard set by the Real Academia Española.
Another initiative, Alberto M. Brambila's Ortografía Fonetika R̃asional Ispanoamerikana, remained a curiosity.
Juan Ramón Jiménez proposed changing and to and , but this is only applied in editions of his works or those of his wife, Zenobia Camprubí.
Gabriel García Márquez raised the issue of reform during a congress at Zacatecas, most notoriously advocating for the suppression of , which is mute in Spanish, but, despite his prestige, no serious changes were adopted.
The Academies, however, from time to time have made minor changes, such as allowing ' instead of ' ('this one'), when there is no possible confusion.
A Mexican Spanish convention is to spell certain indigenous words with rather than the that would be the standard spelling in Spanish. This is generally due to the origin of the word (or the present pronunciation) containing the voiceless postalveolar fricative sound or another sibilant that is not used in modern standard Spanish. The most noticeable word with this feature is México (see Toponymy of Mexico). The Real Academia Española recommends this spelling. The American Spanish colloquial term chicano is shortened from mechicano, which uses in place of the of rural Mexican Spanish .
ARABIC ALPHABET
Section::::Arabic alphabet.
In the 15th and 16th centuries, Spanish (as well as Portuguese and Ladino) was sometimes written in the Arabic alphabet by moriscos. This form of Spanish is called aljamiado.
SEE ALSO
* Inverted question and exclamation marks
* Spanish manual alphabet
* Chilean manual alphabet
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A la nación española: Sobre reformas ortográficas, Mariano Cubí i Soler, Imprenta de Miguel i Jaime Gaspar, Barcelona, 1852 (Biblioteca Digital Hispánica).
* Collation in Spanish
* Ortografía de la lengua española published by the Real Academia Española (RAE).
* Spanish Alphabet Pronunciation – simplified for beginners to Spanish letter pronunciation.
