
SUNFLOWER OIL
Sunflower oil is the non-volatile oil pressed from the seeds of sunflower (Helianthus annuus). Sunflower oil is commonly used in food as a frying oil, and in cosmetic formulations as an emollient. The world's total production of sunflower oil in 2014 was nearly 16 million tonnes, with Ukraine and Russia as the largest producers.
Sunflower oil is a mixture mainly of the polyunsaturated fat, linoleic acid (59% of total), and the monounsaturated fat, oleic acid (30% of total). In sunflower oil plant breeding and manufacturing, four types of processed oil containing different amounts of the major fatty acids are produced. The expressed oil has light amber color with a mild flavor. The oil contains a rich content of vitamin E.
As of 2017, genome analysis and development of hybrid sunflowers to increase oil production are under development to meet greater consumer demand for sunflower oil and its commercial varieties.
COMPOSITION
Section::::Composition.
Sunflower oil is mainly a triglyceride. The British Pharmacopoeia lists the following profile:
* Palmitic acid (saturated): 5%
* Stearic acid (saturated): 6%
* Oleic acid (monounsaturated omega-9): 30%
* Linoleic acid (polyunsaturated omega-6): 59%
Four types of sunflower oils with differing concentrations of fatty acids are produced through plant breeding and industrial processing: high-linoleic, high-oleic, mid-oleic, and high-stearic combined with high-oleic. 
* High-linoleic, 69% linoleic acid
* High-oleic, 82% oleic acid
* Mid-oleic, 65% oleic acid
* High-stearic with high-oleic, 18% stearic acid and 72% oleic acid
In an analysis of the sunflower genome to reveal plant metabolism producing its oil, phytosterols were identified, as confirmed in another analysis of sunflower oil components, including polyphenols, squalene, and terpenoids.
PRODUCTION AND TRADE
Section::::Production and trade.
In 2014, world production of sunflower oil was 15.8 million tonnes, led by Ukraine (4.4 million tonnes), Russia (4.1 million tonnes), Argentina (0.9 million tonnes), and Turkey (0.7 million tonnes). 
NUTRITION
Section::::Nutrition.
Several varieties of sunflower oilseeds have been developed by standard plant breeding methods, mainly to vary the amounts of oleic acid and linoleic acid which, respectively, are the predominant monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats in sunflower oil. Sunflower oil is a rich source of vitamin E (tables).
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES
Section::::Physical properties.
Sunflower oil is liquid at room temperature. The refined oil is clear and slightly amber-colored with a slightly fatty odour.
Saponification value
188-194
Iodine value
120-145
Unsaponifiable matter
1.5-2.0%
Viscosity (25 °C), unrefined
0.04914 
kg/(m*s)
PREPARATION AND STORAGE
Section::::Preparation and storage.
Because sunflower oil is primarily composed of less-stable polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fatty acids, it can be particularly susceptible to degradation by heat, air, and light, which trigger and accelerate oxidation. Keeping sunflower oil at low temperatures during manufacture and storage can help minimize rancidity and nutrient loss—as can storage in bottles that are made of either darkly-colored glass, or, plastic that has been treated with an ultraviolet light protectant.
METHODS OF EXTRACTION
Section::::Methods of extraction.
Sunflower oil can be extracted using chemical solvents (e.g., hexane), or expeller pressing (i.e., squeezed directly from sunflower seeds by crushing them). "Cold-pressing" (or expeller pressing) sunflower seeds under low-temperature conditions is a method that does not use chemical solvents to derive sunflower seed oil.
REFINED VERSUS UNREFINED
Section::::Refined versus unrefined.
Refining sunflower oil through solvent extraction, de-gumming, neutralization, and bleaching can make it more stable and suitable for high-temperature cooking; but, will also remove some of the oil's nutrients; flavor; color (resulting in a pale-yellow); free fatty acids; phospholipids; polyphenols; and, phytosterols. Unrefined sunflower oil is less heat-stable (and therefore well-suited to dishes that are either raw or cooked at low temperatures); but, will retain more of its original nutrient content, flavor, and color (light-amber).
USES
IN FOOD PREPARATION
Section::::Uses.
Section::::In food preparation.
Refined sunflower oil is used for low-to-extremely-high-temperature cooking. As a frying oil, it behaves as a typical vegetable triglyceride. Unrefined sunflower oil is a traditional salad dressing in Eastern European cuisines. Sunflower oil is also an ingredient in sunflower butter.
Methods for cooking snack foods, such as potato chips or French fries, may use sunflower oil.
SEED MEAL
Section::::Seed meal.
Extraction of sunflower oil leaves behind the crushed seeds, typically referred to as seed meal, which is rich in protein and dietary fiber and used as an animal feed, fertilizer or fuel.
SUPPLEMENTS
Section::::Supplements.
Taking sunflower oil dietary supplements is not an effective treatment for eczema.
AS FUEL
Section::::As fuel.
Sunflower oil can be used to run diesel engines when mixed with diesel in the tank. Due to the high levels of unsaturated fats, there is higher viscosity in cold temperatures.
PROPERTIES
REFERENCES
