
OIL OF CLOVE
Oil of clove, also known as clove oil, is an essential oil extracted from the clove plant, Syzygium aromaticum. It has the CAS number 8000-34-8.
Clove is often found in the aromatherapy section of health food stores, and is used in the flavoring of some medicines. Madagascar and Indonesia are the main producers of clove oil.
Clove oil has been promoted as having a wide range of health effects, but there is insufficient medical evidence to support general claims for its use as a therapeutic.
TYPES
Section::::Types.
There are three types of clove oil:
* Bud oil is derived from the flower-buds of S. aromaticum. It consists of 60–90% eugenol, acetyl eugenol, caryophyllene and other minor constituents.
* Leaf oil is derived from the leaves of S. aromaticum. It consists of 82–88% eugenol with little or no eugenyl acetate, and minor constituents.
* Stem oil is derived from the twigs of S. aromaticum. It consists of 90–95% eugenol, with other minor constituents.
USES
Section::::Uses.
Clove oil has been promoted as having a wide range of health effects, but there is insufficient medical evidence to support general claims for its use as a therapeutic.
TOOTHACHE
Section::::Toothache.
Particularly in South Korea and India, eugenol, a phytochemical extracted from clove oil, is used to relieve toothache. Applied to a cavity in a decayed tooth or tooth socket remaining after extraction, eugenol or clove oil can relieve toothache temporarily. The potential mechanisms for how eugenol may inhibit dental pain are under active research.
In the United States, the FDA considers eugenol ineffective for treating dental pain, and has downgraded clove oil as an analgesic due to insufficient evidence to rate its effectiveness.
USE ON FISH
Section::::Use on fish.
Clove oil is commonly used to anesthetize or euthanize laboratory or pet fish.
TOXICITY
Section::::Toxicity.
Little is known of the safety of taking clove oil in large amounts. Serious effects have been reported in young children, even with small doses.
REGULATION
Section::::Regulation.
In Germany, Commission E permits the sale and administration of clove oil as a medicinal herb.
REFERENCES
