
NOS (DRINK)
NOS Energy Drink is an energy drink sold in 16 and 24oz cans. The drink was also once distributed in a bottle designed to look like a NOS (Nitrous Oxide Systems) tank, which was discontinued in 2015. Formerly a property of The Coca-Cola Company, it is currently produced by Monster Beverage and licensed by Holley Performance, which owns the trademark. NOS contains high levels of taurine and caffeine, and it also contains guarana. L-Theanine was removed as a "CMPLX6" ingredient in 2016, with inositol becoming listed as one of the six featured ingredients on the can. NOS Energy is currently available in Original, Sugar Free, Charged Citrus, Cherried Out, GT Grape, Rowdy, and Nitro Mango.
HISTORY
Section::::History.
In February 2005, the Fuze Beverage company launched the beverage. The name "NOS" was licensed from Holley Performance Products, which manufactures the Nitrous Oxide Systems (NOS) brand of automotive nitrous injection systems. According to Holley, NOS is the first automotive product to have a consumable food product share its name and logo. In February 2007, Fuze was purchased by The Coca-Cola Company, which transferred the NOS licence to Coca-Cola. On June 12, 2015, Coca-Cola announced the transfer of its energy division, including NOS and Full Throttle, to Monster Beverage.
TEAM NOS
Section::::Team NOS.
NOS has been involved in various forms of motorsports as its main source of advertising. Team NOS currently consists of NASCAR driver Kyle Busch, Formula Drift driver Chris Forsberg, and rally car racer Brian Deegan. Busch became a NOS Energy driver back in 2008 when he first joined Joe Gibbs Racing. He has raced the No. 18 NOS Energy Toyota Camry to victory lane a record number of times in the Xfinity Series, where he is the all-time leader in race wins, initially from 2008 until 2011, when he switched to then-rival Monster Energy in 2012, around the same time NOS parent Coca-Cola was exploring a sale of its energy drink brands. Following Monster's acquisition of Coca-Cola's energy beverage products, and a corporate decision to realign the Busch Brothers, both of whom are affiliated with Monster Beverage, Kyle was aligned with NOS Energy in 2016. The partnership between Busch and NOS Energy has grown to be the largest in the brand's history. In the fall of 2016, Monster Beverage released its newest flavor "NOS Rowdy" which was inspired by Busch and his nickname "Rowdy".
INGREDIENTS
Section::::Ingredients.
Ingredients are carbonated water, high fructose corn syrup, citric acid, sodium citrate, sodium hexametaphosphate (preservative), caffeine, taurine, natural flavors, acacia, potassium sorbate (preservative), glycerol ester of rosin, inositol, sucralose, yellow 5, calcium disodium edta (preservative), pyridoxine hydrochloride (vitamin B6), yellow 6, guarana, cyanocobalamin (vitamin B12)
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
