
ARCHIE MARRIES VERONICA/ARCHIE MARRIES BETTY
"Archie Marries Veronica/Archie Marries Betty" is an American comic book story by writer Michael Uslan and artists Stan Goldberg and Bob Smith that was originally presented in Archie # 600–606. In issues # 600–602, the story features a futuristic look into the life of Riverdale teen Archie Andrews in the years that follow his college graduation when Archie makes his ultimate decision to marry Veronica Lodge instead of Betty Cooper. In Issues # 603–605, the story switches and Archie proposes marriage to Betty instead of to Veronica. Issue #606 serves as the epilogue to the story and ties the previous six issues together.
BACKGROUND
Section::::Background.
In May 2009, Archie Comics released plans for what they would call "The Archie Story Of The Century" and announced that Archie Andrews would ask Veronica Lodge to marry him in Archie Comics # 600, the first issue of a six-part story arc detailing their engagement, marriage and life together. The publishers of Archie Comics did not expect the response they would get from readers and longtime fans telling them they made a mistake in Archie's choice. The New York Times would later reveal that the whole story is simply a fantasy and that the first half of the story would show Archie's life with Veronica, and the second half would show his life with Betty.
PLOT
PART 1: ARCHIE MARRIES VERONICA: "THE PROPOSAL" (ISSUE 600)
Section::::Plot.
Section::::Part 1: Archie Marries Veronica: "The Proposal" (Issue 600).
"The Proposal" is Part 1 in the 6 issue story arc, in which Archie decides to marry Veronica. 
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis.
The night before the gang's graduation from Riverdale High, The Archies play their final concert and mourn the oncoming changes. Archie comes home and after getting heat from his father about picking a college, he takes a walk down Memory Lane... literally. Archie realizes he's never walked up Memory Lane before and switches directions. After traveling through a yellow wood, Memory Lane splits into two dirt roads. He chooses the left one and was cast four years into the future on the eve of his college graduation. His mother Mary states that Veronica Lodge is waiting for him inside the house. He and Veronica discuss the changes in their lives, and both accept growing up.
After the graduation, Veronica hosts a party at her mansion. Archie learns that Veronica is planning to work for her father's company in either London or Hong Kong. As for the rest of the gang, Moose Mason is going to manage his uncle's burger joint on Staten Island while his girlfriend Midge Klump will be running her own nail salon in Bayonne, New Jersey. Dilton Doiley is going to M.I.T. for his doctorate in quantum mechanics, Reggie Mantle will become a used car salesman in Atlanta and Jughead Jones will stick around Riverdale grilling burgers at Pop Tate's Choklit Shoppe until he "figures things out". Finally, Betty Cooper will be working as a buyer at Saks Fifth Avenue in New York City.
After the party, Archie is given a large sum of money by his parents which he uses for the down payment on an engagement ring for Veronica a few weeks later in New York. He proposes to her just as Betty and Jughead happen to walk by and witness. Veronica accepts, while Betty runs weeping in an unknown direction. Eventually, Archie and Veronica tell Mr. Lodge, who accepts Archie as his future son-in-law as long as he works for Lodge Industries. Archie accepts while his fiancee plans the biggest wedding Riverdale has ever seen. Jughead later chastises Archie for not telling him his plan, and advised him not to go near Betty for a while, so that she will be able to get over with and move on.
The residents of Riverdale are overwhelmed with shock that Archie finally chose between his two girlfriends, but also concerned with Betty's well being. Veronica calls Betty and asks her to be her maid of honor. Instead of answering, Betty simply leaves the phone on her bed.
PART 2: ARCHIE MARRIES VERONICA: "THE WEDDING" (ISSUE 601)
Section::::Part 2: Archie Marries Veronica: "The Wedding" (Issue 601).
"The Wedding" is Part 2 in the 6 issue story arc. 
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis.
Archie is preparing for his upcoming nuptials with his groomsmen. Meanwhile, Veronica is treating her bridesmaids to a day at the spa. Veronica is sad that Betty Cooper is not there, but Betty shows up at that moment takes up her position as Veronica's maid of honor. Betty brings along a "friend" of hers named Henry who works with her. Ethel states that he reminds her of Archie as Betty rushes him out the door. On the eve of the wedding, Archie and Veronica discuss their future. The big day comes and everything seems to be going as planned, with all of Riverdale attending the wedding. Before the ceremony, Archie asks Betty to take a walk with him. He tells her that she was his first friend when his family moved to Riverdale and how he always enjoyed dating her, until Veronica came. Archie tells Betty that he loves her like a sister and asks her to promise to always be his friend, which comforts Betty.
The wedding goes smoothly. Archie and Veronica become husband and wife as Betty looks on tearfully, but happily. At the reception, Archie and Veronica share their first dance, speeches are made, the cake is cut, and the bouquet is tossed. Betty catches it and walks away trying to hide her tears. Veronica catches up to her to make sure she's okay. Archie and Veronica then depart on their honeymoon to a remote island in the Caribbean owned by the Lodges.
One year later, Archie is a big executive at Lodge Enterprises, who overworks so as to impress his father-in-law who has confidence in him. Reggie shows up and tells Archie he's been laid off, so Archie gives him a job in sales. When he comes home exhausted, Veronica reminds him of a dinner date they have with Ethel and her fiancé. Archie is simply too tired and refuses to move, until Veronica announces that she's pregnant and he promptly faints.
PART 3: ARCHIE MARRIES VERONICA: "IT'S TWINS!" (ISSUE 602)
Section::::Part 3: Archie Marries Veronica: "It's Twins!" (Issue 602).
"It's Twins" is Part 3 in the 6 issue story.
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis.
Archie announces Veronica's pregnancy to his parents, while Jughead, Reggie, and Moose burst in with congratulations. Archie then breaks the news to Mr. Lodge, who immediately has his will changed to bestow his most prized possession, his own childhood sled, to his grandchild. Meanwhile, Veronica flies to New York City to meet with Betty at a run-down diner. Betty hasn't been faring well in the city as she's recently been laid off and her relationship with Henry has ended. Veronica announces that she is pregnant and asks Betty to be the godmother, to which she agrees.
Two trimesters later, Archie and Veronica begin Lamaze class, which proves to be a slapstick disaster for Archie. One night when Veronica's ill, Jughead fills in for her replete with a pillow under his shirt and hilarity ensues. Despite all of this, Archie promises to be calm when the big day arrives. Shortly thereafter, Veronica goes into labor and he drives her to the hospital. Soon, Veronica delivers a a pair of fraternal twins, a redheaded boy named Archie, and a black haired girl named Veronica.
Time passes and Archie and Veronica move back to Riverdale and buy a minivan. Parenting is exhausting for both of them, but they lovingly raise their children past diapers and bottles. When the children are around three, the Andrews and the Lodges celebrate Christmas together. The children are sent to bed and Archie and Veronica discuss their happiness, and says he would be just as happy without the money. Archie tucks his children to bed and reads them "The Road Not Taken" by Robert Frost in its entirety. Before wrapping up the rest of the presents, Archie insists on going for a walk during the first snow of the season. He and Veronica kissed and he heads out the door. He walks up Memory Lane and comes to the yellow wood and begins walking down the right fork in the road.
PART 4: ARCHIE MARRIES BETTY: "WILL YOU MARRY ME?" (ISSUE 603)
Section::::Part 4: Archie Marries Betty: "Will You Marry Me?" (Issue 603).
"Will You Marry Me?" is Part 4 in the 6 issue story arc, in which Archie Andrews proposed to Betty Cooper after college in an alternate reality.
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis.
Archie, still in his winter coat from his walk during the first snow of the season, arriving back in time right before his college graduation. Archie then rushes home to get ready for graduation, and the ceremony proceeds much as it did in Part 1, with Dilton giving the valedictorian address. After graduation, Archie, Reggie, and Jughead drive to Pop Tate's Choklit Shoppe for a party. Reggie comments on how unlikely marriage is after college. Jughead is relieved at this statistic, but Archie seems optimistic and announces that he has finally made his choice between Veronica and Betty, but wants to talk "to the girls first."
Upon entering Pop's, Betty asks Archie for a dance, but he has Veronica on the brain and Betty points him in her direction. Veronica, surrounded by a group of handsome young men, is telling about a graduation trip around the world in 80 days. Archie asks to speak with her privately and starts to reminisce about the day she moved to Riverdale, but she keeps interrupting him. Moose demands that The Archies play a few songs. The group thenentertain everyone with one of their hits, "Jingle Jangle", then Moose starts a food fight that Jughead thoroughly enjoys.
After the gang cleans up their mess, Archie attempts to resume his conversation with Veronica, but she interrupts him again to tell him she's moving to Paris after her trip to run her father's fashion holdings. After this news, Archie decides to stop talking with Veronica and decides to talk with Betty instead. Archie reminds Betty of how they first met and were always friends, and said he can never fit into Veronica's high society world. Betty assumes he's going to ask her to "go steady," but instead Archie proposes to her. Betty, in shock for a moment, jumps for joy and accepts. Archie and Betty kiss as Veronica watches in awe and disgust. Midge swoons at the romantic moment and prods her longtime boyfriend, Moose for a similar proposal, but he makes a joke instead. She slams his mortarboard over his head. Meanwhile, Reggie tries to comfort her. but she also breaks his mortarboard over his head. Veronica screams at Archie, claiming he missed his chance, but Archie defends his engagement to Betty in turn claiming that "she" was the one who missed her chance with him. Veronica leaves in anger and disbelief.
Archie and Betty tell both their parents about the engagement. The Andrews are very pleased with their son's choice of "marrying for love, not money", while the Coopers are also very happy. Betty then tells them that they plan to have a small, inexpensive wedding at Pop Tate's. Meanwhile, Veronica cries on her father's shoulder, but he assures her that there are plenty of men out there and "things always work out for the best." All of Riverdale is gossiping about the upcoming nuptials, and whether Veronica's fortune should be a factor. On the night of Archie's bachelor party at Pop Tate's, his groomsmen, Jughead, Reggie, Moose, Dilton, and Chuck express concern for Veronica and her place among Betty's bridesmaids. Meanwhile, Betty goes to the Lodge estate and asks Veronica to be her maid of honor, who promptly slams the door in her face. However, after seeing her so upset, Veronica agrees and tells Betty "she won Archie fair and square". Later that night, Archie and Betty go for a walk. Archie has been unable to find a job during the recession, and apologizes for not offering a better honeymoon for Betty. However, Betty says she is already satisfied with Archie. 
PART 5: ARCHIE MARRIES BETTY: "YOU MAY KISS THE BRIDE!" (ISSUE 604)
Section::::Part 5: Archie Marries Betty: "You May Kiss The Bride!" (Issue 604).
"You May Kiss The Bride!" is Part 5 in the 6 issue story arc. The story features a futuristic look into the life of Archie Andrews and his wedding to Betty Cooper.
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis.
Archie has been unable to find a job. In desperation, he goes to meet with Mr. Lodge at his office. Mr. Lodge tells him that he cannot accept him, not for jilting his daughter (he thinks Archie is a bright fellow), but that his company is not hiring anyone. In the midst of their wedding preparations, Betty reveals to Archie that she has received a job offer as a buyer for Saks 5th Avenue in New York City. She had applied before they became engaged because it was something she wanted to try, but plans to turn down the job in order to be a teacher and to be with Archie. He is shocked at first, but tells her that instead of putting everyone else first, she needs to follow her dreams for once, and decides they should move up their wedding day to the following weekend and then move to New York, which makes Jughead and Pops faint.
Everyone arrives to celebrate the party of the year. Veronica is about to reveal the dress she bought, hoping to draw attention away from the bride, but the wedding cake that Betty made herself collapses and is ruined. Seeing this, Veronica decides to save the day by ordering the biggest most expensive wedding cake money can buy and changes into something she feels is more appropriate for the occasion; a waitress's uniform. Archie and Betty exchange their vows. The Bride and Groom then invite all the guests to join them in their first dance. The wedding cake Veronica ordered arrives and everyone is very proud of her, while Archie and Betty thank her for her very generous gift. Veronica asks them where they plan to go for their honeymoon, but they tell her that they can't afford one yet. She takes Archie aside and offers to pay for a honeymoon for them in secret. He thanks her for the offer but turns her down, saying that he is responsible for Betty now, and wish not to hide anything from his wife.
After the wedding, the two set off for New York City. Betty impresses Cassie, her new boss on her very first day on the job. Archie's efforts to find a job continue to be unsuccessful until he encounters a club owner who is looking for someone who can play the guitar and sing. Several months pass and the Andrews attend Betty's first corporate dinner with Cassie and her boss, Mr. Hugo. When they first meet him he makes a crack about Archie's clothes and talent. Archie tries to defend himself, but Betty tries to pass it off as a joke. However, when he tries to insult Archie again, Betty loses it and tells him she would punch him if she wasn't as classy as her husband, and quits her job on the spot. The two decide to move back to Riverdale, and Archie willingly gives up his thriving music career. The next day, while packing their bags, Cassie shows up at their apartment and tries convincing her to stay on in her job. However, Betty thanks her and says she already has a great future with Archie back in their hometown. Cassie wishes them well.
Back in Riverdale, Archie and Betty temporarily move in with Archie's parents. Mr. Weatherbee has a teaching position available for Betty, and also offers Archie a position of the school's music teacher, which he accepts. That night, Archie and Betty celebrate their first anniversary with a romantic dinner and share a malt with three straws in it. Archie, confused and thinking that Veronica would be joining them, is told that the third straw isn't for her, but for someone he will love. Betty tells him she's pregnant, and Archie chokes on the malt and faints.
PART 6: ARCHIE MARRIES BETTY: "HAPPILY EVER AFTER" (ISSUE 605)
Section::::Part 6: Archie Marries Betty: "Happily Ever After" (Issue 605).
"Happily Ever After" is Part 6 in the 6 issue story arc. 
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis.
Archie & Betty meets up with Jughead & Midge and are shocked to learn that they are now married, fearing that Moose will kill them. However, Moose, who is now the custodian at Riverdale High, has been practicing yoga and meditation and is less hot-tempered than before. Archie and Betty learn that Pop Tate is retiring and has sold the Chok'lit Shoppe to Jughead and Midge and it has been renamed "Juggie's". At the new Juggie's, the gang runs into Veronica (who returned from Europe) & Reggie, and learn they are engaged. On their ride home, Archie says he believes it is wrong, but Betty thinks that he is wishing it was him who had proposed to Veronica. Archie then explains he is worried that the marriage is based on money only and will end badly, hurting both of his friends. Betty accepts his statement and they make up.
As the next few months pass, Archie & Betty become two of the most popular teachers at Riverdale High, and as Betty's pregnancy advances, they start to spend less time with his friends.One day, as Archie plans to go for a bike ride, Betty goes into labor. In panic, instead of an ambulance, Archie calls the water department. After a few obstacles, Betty is rushed to the maternity ward, and soon gives birth to fraternal twins; a red haired boy named Archie and a blonde haired girl named Betty. Soon, the Coopers and the Andrews arrive along with all their friends and colleagues. Archie and Betty ask Jughead, Veronica and Reggie to be the twins' godparents, while Reggie & Veronica ask them to be their best man and maid of honor at their wedding. After making some arrangements, Veronica managed to hire a jet for the gang and employed the nurses to take care of Archie's twins so that they can all attend their wedding. Reggie and Veronica marries.
As Archie & Betty adjust to parenthood, life goes on in Riverdale. Jughead & Midge are soon expecting a child of their own. Mr. Weatherbee & Miss Grundy along with Miss Beazley & Mr. Svenson have started dating. Archie & Betty receive a postcard from Veronica & Reggie detailing all of their world travels and new ventures. Betty comments to him that could have been his life, but Archie tells her he doesn't want that life when he has already the best life with her. Archie later decides to go for a walk in the woods and then decides to walk down Memory Lane, and soon finds himself back in the present. He runs into Jughead who reminds him of the poetry recital in Miss Grundy's class the next day. Archie tells him he worries too much. As the two best friends walk home, he reads his part of the poetry reading, the last stanza of "The Road Not Taken" by Robert Frost.
EPILOGUE: ARCHIE GETS MARRIED: "YESTERDAY, TODAY, TOMORROW" (ISSUE 606)
Section::::Epilogue: Archie Gets Married: "Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow" (Issue 606).
"Yesterday, Today, Tomorrow" is the epilogue that ends the series. 
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis.
After his experiences walking up Memory Lane, Archie tries talking about it to Betty and Veronica, but they are both too busy to talk to him. Needing to talk to someone about it, he tells Reggie and Jughead about his strange visions. Reggie dismisses his experiences, while Jughead believes him. Archie decides to go bowling with Reggie and Jughead to clear his mind from his experience. When Betty arrives Archie asks her out on Saturday night, which she accepts. However, as he was overwhelmed with the kiss with Betty, Archie mishears Betty and thinks she said "Friday". Later he asks Veronica for a date on the same night and she says yes.
When Saturday night arrives, Archie realizes he asked both Betty and Veronica out on the same night. The girls arrived in anger and poured milkshakes on his head. The next day, Betty and Veronica are still mad at Archie, but Jughead comforts him and says one of them will eventually forgive him. Archie decides to apologize to both of them and take control of his own future. When talking about the future, Archie asks Jughead if he ever thought about buying Pop's place after he retires. However, Jughead denies this, saying he will have to think about the future and prefers to live in the present.
SPIN-OFFS
Section::::Spin-offs.
The success of the Archie Marries Veronica/Archie Marries Betty storyline led to the comic series, Life with Archie: The Married Life, and a similar storyline called "Archie Marries Valerie", depicting Archie marrying Valerie from Josie and the Pussycats, shown in Archie #631-634.
LIFE WITH ARCHIE: THE MARRIED LIFE
Section::::Life with Archie: The Married Life.
Life with Archie: The Married Life was based on the Archie Marries Veronica/Archie Marries Betty storyline, but was not a direct continuation on it. The series lasted from 2010 to 2014, ending with 37 issues. Issues 1-35 contained two stories each, the first story was Archie Marries Veronica and the second one was Archie Marries Betty. The last two issues, on the other hand, were structured differently. Instead of having two stories both issues had one, but were twice as long as the others. Also, neither issue made it clear whether Archie was married to Betty or Veronica. Together both issues make up The Death of Archie storyline.
ARCHIE MARRIES VALERIE
Section::::Archie Marries Valerie.
The "Archie Marries Valerie" storyline was similar to the Archie Marries Veronica/Archie Marries Betty storyline, but had some major differences. For instance, Valerie was the one who walked up Memory Lane instead of Archie and she could see the future in portals rather than actually experiencing it. She sees a future in where she marries Archie, then they both quit their respective bands due to their touring schedules keeping them apart, and later have a little girl named Star who is gifted with her parents' musical talent. However, she decides to stop watching it after she sees that they cannot get a moment's peace due to Star becoming an object of attention for the media. Then she witness glimpses of other futures and in each one Archie is married to a different woman. Some of these futures had Archie being married to Cheryl Blossom, Sabrina Spellman, and even Josie. Seeing these futures Valerie runs out of Memory Lane and happily reunites with Archie.
SOURCES
