
HANNAH MONTANA (SEASON 4)
The fourth and final season of the television series Hannah Montana (marketed as Hannah Montana Forever) began airing on Disney Channel on July 11, 2010. Disney Channel renewed the series for a fourth season on June 1, 2009 along with Sonny With a Chance, and production of the season began on January 18, 2010, and ended on May 14, 2010. In this season, Mitchel Musso's character Oliver Oken becomes a recurring character, and is no longer in the main cast, due to Musso starring on the Disney XD series Pair of Kings. In the season, the Stewarts and Lilly move to a ranch in Malibu. This is the only season of the show to be broadcast in High Definition. The season ended on January 16, 2011 (USA) and May 27, 2011 (UK & Ireland).
The fourth and final season of the series was released on DVD on March 8, 2011.
PRODUCTION
OPENING SEQUENCE
Section::::Production.
Section::::Opening sequence.
For season four, the opening credits from season three were used with some minor revisions. The names (excluding Mitchel Musso as his character has become a recurring character) appear on a scrolling marquee as one would see on a theater, featuring a different font. The sequence then changes to wide-screen episode clips, in which only season 4 episode clips are included. The same version of the song "The Best of Both Worlds" from Season 3 was used; however, a green screened concert version was used with the Season 3 concert stage for the concert scenes. The creators' names appear in the second to last clip. A new version of the switch from Miley to Hannah is featured in the middle of the theme song, as Miley admires a hug between her and her dad in a clip of Hannah Montana Forever. At the end, the versions of Hannah's "shhh" and "laugh" clips were changed to one clip instead of two separate clips.
CASTING
Section::::Casting.
In season 4, Mitchel Musso was not a part of the main cast; he appeared instead in a recurring role. On March 3, 2010, some guest stars were identified. They include Ray Liotta, Angus T. Jones, Sheryl Crow, and Christine Taylor. Another role that has been introduced is a girlfriend for Jackson, portrayed by Tammin Sursok.
Recurring and guest cast include: Tammin Sursok as Siena, Cody Linley as Jake, Dolly Parton as Aunt Dolly, Vicki Lawrence as Mamaw Ruthie, Shanica Knowles and Anna Maria Perez de Taglé as Amber and Ashley, and Drew Roy as Jesse.
CAST
MAIN
* Miley Cyrus as Miley Stewart
* Emily Osment as Lilly Truscott
* Jason Earles as Jackson Stewart
* Moises Arias as Rico Suave
* Billy Ray Cyrus as Robby Ray Stewart
SPECIAL GUEST
* Mitchel Musso as Oliver Oken
MUSIC
Section::::Music.
"Are You Ready", "Ordinary Girl", "I'm Still Good", "Que Sera", and "Gonna Get This" were used to promote season four of Hannah Montana. The soundtrack was released on October 19, 2010.
EPISODES
* This season was filmed from January 18 to May 14, 2010.
* Mitchel Musso no longer a main cast
* Mitchel Musso makes a guest appearance in two episodes.
INTERNATIONAL RELEASE
Section::::International release.
! Country / Region
! Network(s)
! Series premiere
! Notes
! References
REFERENCES
General references
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hannah Montana broadcast schedule at zap2it.com
