
DEVIL MAY CRY 5
Devil May Cry 5 is an upcoming action-adventure hack and slash video game developed and published by Capcom. It is the fifth installment of the mainline Devil May Cry series, and is scheduled to be released on 8 March 2019.
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay.
The gameplay will feature the return of Dante and Nero as playable characters, along with a new character, named "V". The gameplay is similar to the other titles in the Devil May Cry series, focusing on fast-paced "stylish action". The player fights off hordes of demons with a variety of attacks and weapons and receives a style-rating in combat based on a number of factors, such as move variety, the length of a combo and dodging attacks. The music in the game will change based on the player's performance in combat.
Nero is equipped with his Red Queen sword, his Blue Rose double-barreled revolver, and an assortment of new robotic arms called Devil Breakers, with a variety of functions such as grabbing enemies from a distance or stopping time to freeze an enemy in place. Along with his signature blade Rebellion and the demonic sword Sparda, Dante was shown using two new Devil Arms, a pair of buzzsaw-like weapons that combine into a motorcycle called Cavaliere, and a set of fiery gauntlets and boots called Balrog. In addition, Dante will also wield Cerberus, introduced in Devil May Cry 3. The third playable character, V, is shown wielding a cane and a book. During an interview, Capcom decided not to disclose how exactly V fights yet, though have teased that V's combat would be completely different from Nero's and Dante's. In the Game Awards 2018 trailer, it is revealed that V uses three demons based on enemies from the first game to fight which includes Griffon, an eagle that uses ranged lightning based attacks, Shadow, a panther that forms blades, spikes and portals out of its body, and Nightmare, a large golem which V enters a Devil Trigger-like state, which turns his hair white, to summon, which uses a combination of melee attacks and laser beams.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
The story takes place several years after the events of Devil May Cry 2. A man known as "V" comes to the Devil May Cry office to hire Dante to solve a series of demon attacks occurring across the world. Meanwhile, Nero has set up his own demon hunting agency based out of a van adorned with a neon "Devil May Cry" sign Dante gave him with support by his engineer Nico, who built him a robotic prosthetic arm called the "Devil Breaker" after his original Devil Bringer arm was taken by a mysterious hooded individual. Nero's hunt for the hooded figure brings him to city that Dante deduced as the epicenter of the demon attacks.
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Development.
The game is directed by Devil May Cry series veteran Hideaki Itsuno. It runs on the RE Engine, developed for . Itsuno explained that the development team is aiming for a "photo-realistic" graphics style. The game is confirmed to be targeting 60 fps on all targeted release platforms. The developers scanned various models to give a realistic look to the characters and even real clothes which were created in London and scanned in Serbia. Capcom confirmed that the release date will be 8 March 2019. A demo version was playable in August 2018 at Gamescom.
In 2013, Itsuno showed interest in continuing the original Devil May Cry series by developing a fifth installment. It was originally thought that the series could go on hiatus or end for good if Devil May Cry 4: Special Edition was not a commercial success. However, in an interview with GameSpot, Itsuno confirmed that the series future did not depend on Devil May Cry 4: Special Editions sales. He also alleviated fears that s sales ended the series, confirming that Capcom was ultimately satisfied with final sales figures of those games. In mid-January 2016, Itsuno stated on Twitter that he is working on a project well in development which could not be announced just yet and later in March, Reuben Langdon and Johnny Yong Bosch, who had done voice acting and motion capture for Dante and Nero respectively in Devil May Cry 4, took pictures of themselves in motion capture gear, leading to speculation that a new Devil May Cry game is in development. In response on Twitter regarding any truth about the speculation, Capcom Vancouver stated that "It's not a game that [they] announced that [they are] working on at [their] studio". On 17 May 2018, the domain name "DevilMayCry5.com" was registered by an unknown entity under Capcom's Onamae domain register. Devil May Cry 5 was confirmed at E3 2018 for a release the following year.
The game was originally planned to be announced in 2017. However, ideas to announce it alongside the Resident Evil 2 remake led to its change. The game is being developed by Capcom Dev Studio 1 and consists of many staff members who worked on entries in the Dragon's Dogma and the Devil May Cry series. The team is aiming to make it the best action game from the Heisei period. A secret message was left in the first trailer for fans of the series. Dante and Nero's respective actors, Reuben Langdon and Johnny Yong Bosch, have expressed pleasure in regards to the game.
Nico was created to be a contrasting heroine to Nero's girlfriend, Kyrie, as the former is more used to fighting. In developing Nero's Devil Breaker abilities, Itsuno pointed out that Punch Line which involves Nero shooting his mechanic arm was made in order to attract teenagers.
On 11 June 2018, Nero's battle theme, titled "Devil Trigger", was released as a soundtrack single to promote the game.
During September 2018, Dante's original battle theme "Subhuman" by Suicide Silence was released. However, Capcom removed the song from the soundtrack after finding out that the band's lead vocalist Hernan "Eddie" Hermida "emotionally and sexually manipulated" an Austrian woman when she was 17 and Eddie was 32. Capcom has replaced Hermida with former Volumes vocalist Michael Barr to be the new vocalist on the song.
In December 2018, V's battle theme "Crimson Cloud" by Jeff Rona feat. Rachel Fannan, was released.
Players who purchase the Deluxe Edition of the game will receive access to the several pieces of additional content, such as the Cavaliere R weapon for Dante, new cutscenes and announcer options, battle music from the first four Devil May Cry titles, and four Devil Breaker weapons for Nero, including a Mega Buster based on Mega Man 11.
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
Following 2018's Tokyo Game Show, Devil May Cry 5 won the "Future Division" award from the Japan Game Awards. There has been some disquiet in the gaming community regarding the decision to include optional in game purchases where you can purchase red orbs which are used to upgrade your character. Capcom has confirmed to fans that this in no way alters the game's designed progression system, and it is similar to that of DMC4:SE which also allowed for similar in game purchases.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
