
BOB'S BURGERS
Bob's Burgers is an American animated sitcom created by Loren Bouchard that premiered on Fox on January 9, 2011. The series centers on the Belcher family – parents Bob and Linda and their children Tina, Gene and Louise – who run a hamburger restaurant. The show was conceived by Bouchard after he developed Home Movies. It is produced and distributed in association with 20th Century Fox Television.
While reviews for the first season were mixed, feedback for subsequent seasons has been much more positive. The series premiere, "Human Flesh", drew in 9.39 million viewers, making it the highest-rated series premiere of the season and finishing ninth in the ratings for the week it aired. Reruns began airing on Cartoon Network's late night programming block Adult Swim on June 23, 2013 and began airing in syndication on local stations in September 2015.
A comic book series based on the show, published by Dynamite Entertainment, began in September 2014 and a soundtrack album was released on May 12, 2017.
In 2013, TV Guide ranked Bob's Burgers as one of the top 60 Greatest TV Cartoons of All Time. The series has been nominated for several awards, including the Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program seven consecutive times, winning in 2014 and 2017.
On October 7, 2015, Fox renewed the series for the seventh and eighth production cycles. On March 27, 2018, Fox renewed the series for a ninth season, which premiered on September 30, 2018. A feature film of the animated television series is in the works and is scheduled for a July 17, 2020 release.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
The show centers on the Belcher family—Bob, Linda, and their children Tina, Gene, and Louise; who run a burger restaurant on Ocean Avenue in an unnamed seaside community (informally known as "Seymour's Bay" among the show's writing staff). While series creator Loren Bouchard has said that the show's location was an indeterminate Northeastern United States shore town (calling the setting a "semi-Springfield)", some critics, particularly after the episode "It Snakes a Village", have deduced that the unidentified setting appears to actually be southern New Jersey. A bus driver in the episode "Eat, Spray, Linda" references a stop at Wildwood Wharf, which may refer to Wildwood, New Jersey, a city on the southeastern coast of the state.
Bob's Burgers is located in a green two-story building which features an apartment on the second floor where the Belcher family lives. The restaurant is sandwiched between two other commercial buildings, one of which houses "It's Your Funeral Home and Crematorium", whose owner Mort is a regular at the restaurant. One of the show's running gags involves the other building, which is generally vacant during episodes but has been home to such businesses as "Uncle Marty's Breast Pumps", "Extra Moist Yoga", "That's a-Door-a-Bell Doorbells", and "Tire-Rhea".
Success is not easy, as Bob must compete with several other eateries for business. His biggest rival is Jimmy Pesto, who owns an Italian restaurant called "Jimmy Pesto's Pizzeria", which is located directly across the street. It attracts many more customers than Bob's Burgers, creating tension between the two owners. Jimmy particularly enjoys humiliating Bob, an example being in the episode "Burgerboss", when he got a higher score on an arcade machine than Bob, who had rented the game, and taunted him by putting "BOB SUX" as his initials. The hatred between Bob and Jimmy is full of humor. Although they dislike each other, Bob's daughter, Tina, shows obsessive interest toward Pesto's eldest son, Jimmy Junior. However, it is often unclear how Jimmy Jr. feels toward Tina, although he always tries to get her back when she expresses interest in other boys. He approves of her erotic friend fiction, starring himself, in "Bad Tina", but tends to forget they are dating because he is always occupied with activities, such as spending time with best friend and wrestling buddy, Zeke, and dancing by himself.
Bob's restaurant also has seen its fair share of bad luck. For example, in the show's opening, the property falls victim to a fire, an infestation of vermin, and a broken front window caused by a car knocking down a utility pole. In spite of all this, Bob does have a small but loyal group of regular customers, including the aforementioned Mort, and Teddy, a local handyman.
CHARACTERS
BELCHER FAMILY
Section::::Characters.
Section::::Belcher family.
The Belcher family runs a hamburger restaurant. 
* Bob Belcher (H. Jon Benjamin) is one of the main protagonists of the show and owner of "Bob's Burgers." He is husband to Linda and father to Tina, Gene, and Louise. He is a third generation restaurateur and is 47 years old. Bob was born to an unnamed mother and Big Bob who ran a diner called "Big Bob's Diner." Bob had a relatively unhappy childhood as his mother died when he was young and his father was an alcoholic who forced Bob to constantly work. He is also known to never smile. Bob is the more sensible one of the bunch though he isn't afraid to get petty and is often stubborn and exasperated. Despite his somewhat pessimistic personality he loves and cares for his family very much as well as his restaurant. Bob has black hair and black eyes. Many fans suspect that the family is of Ashkenazi Jewish, Greek, Italian, or Armenian background though it is confirmed Bob is of French or French Canadian descent due to his surname. The show's official wiki reveals that his height is 6'1.
* Linda Belcher (John Roberts) is one of the main protagonists of the show and wife to Bob and mother to Tina, Gene, and Louise. She is fun-loving and happy go lucky, a positive contrast to her husband's pessimistic personality. Linda is generally laid back and enthusiastic in whatever she does. Linda is shown to be very supportive such as encouraging Tina to write erotic fanfiction or supporting her sister Gayle in her anus themed paintings which Gayle hangs in the restaurant. However Linda can be strict when she wants to be, showing less leniency when Louise doesn't listen to her. Linda has black hair and black eyes and wears glasses. Linda is 45 years old.
* Tina Belcher (Dan Mintz) is the oldest of the three Belcher children and is a socially awkward and insecure character. She is like many teenage girls, fantasizing over her crushes and being a fan of boy groups such as "Boyz 4 Now". She likes horses, rainbows, butts, zombies, writing erotic fiction, and movies. Tina has a massive crush on Jimmy Pesto (Bob's rival)'s son, Jimmy Jr., who doesn't seem to notice Tina's affections. She is a hopeless romantic and writes various fanfiction about Jimmy Jr. and her life. Out of the three siblings, Tina is arguably the most responsible, although Gene and Louise take advantage of her innocence. Like everyone else in her family, Tina has black hair and black eyes, and wears glasses like her mother. She is 13 years old.
* Gene Belcher (Eugene Mirman) is the second child and the only boy of the family. Like his mother, Gene is carefree and friendly. Gene enjoys pestering everyone around him by using sound effects with either his Casio SK-5 keyboard or his megaphone. He frequently records fart sounds and uses them as sound effects and additions to his music. He is quite close to everyone in his family, especially Louise. He is a prankster who helps Louise with her many schemes and is an aspiring musician. Like the rest of his family Gene has black hair and black eyes. He is 11 years old.
* Louise Belcher (Kristen Schaal), is the youngest. Louise is somewhat of a precocious menace and an instigator of many of the debacles that face the Belcher family. She is quite manipulative, cunning, sharp tongued, and enjoys scheming and pranking people. There is a fan theory that Louise could be sociopath or psychopath. Louise is quite close to her father and arguably could be the only one she truly respects in her family. Louise is distant with her mother and frequently disobeys her. Louise also wears a pink bunny hat which she refuses to take off, her uncovered head has yet to be seen, with Louise opting to wear a hood whenever her hat is missing. Louise gets quite attached to inanimate objects, such as her pink bunny hat or money which makes her behave very erratically at times. Despite her seemingly noxious disposition, Louise displays genuine moments of heart when she fears Tina has been electrocuted, her school friend has an apparently critical allergic reaction to chocolate, and attempts to save Linda from a perceived murderer by physically attacking the would-be assailant. Also, she can show affection though it usually comes through in the form of helping her family or friends in tricky situations. Like the rest of her family, Louise has black hair and black eyes. She is 9 years old.
RECURRING CHARACTERS
Section::::Recurring characters.
There are various recurring characters in the series including Jimmy Pesto, Sr. (Jay Johnston), Bob's primary business rival who owns an Italian-themed restaurant across the street, and his sons Jimmy Jr. (Benjamin), Tina's love interest, and hyperactive and childish twins Andy (Laura Silverman) and Ollie (Sarah Silverman), who are friends of Louise. They get along well, despite the enmity between their fathers. Other friends, and frenemies, of the Belcher kids include Zeke (Bobby Tisdale), Tammy (Jenny Slate), Jocelyn (John Roberts), and Regular-Sized Rudy (Brian Huskey). Mr. Frond (David Herman) is the guidance counselor at their school.
Other recurring characters include customers Teddy (Larry Murphy) and Mort (Andy Kindler), as well as Linda's eccentric sister Gayle (Megan Mullally), and the Belchers' sometimes-meddling landlord, Calvin Fischoeder (Kevin Kline) and his brother Felix (Zach Galifianakis). Bob is frequently antagonized by health inspector Hugo (Sam Seder), Linda's ex-fiancé who holds a grudge against Bob and constantly schemes to get the restaurant shut down, though his plans are often revealed to the Belchers by his easy-going assistant, Ron (Ron Lynch).
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production.
Creator Loren Bouchard said Bob's Burgers came about because Fox's animation brand centers mostly on family, but he also wanted to dabble in workplace comedy. The show has generally been viewed as a spiritual successor to King of the Hill, which carried less emphasis on shock comedy and focused more on character-driven humor; Bob's Burgers executive producer Jim Dauterive worked on King of the Hill for nearly its entire run.
PROOF OF CONCEPT
Section::::Proof of concept.
Before the show was aired, the team created a proof of concept so Fox Broadcasting Company knew what to expect if they bought the show. Jay Howell had his art featured in a test animation based on Bob forgetting about his and Linda's wedding anniversary. This proof of concept eventually turned into the pilot episode. It had the same synopsis as the official pilot (aired in 2011) but had both cosmetic and substantial differences. These included:
* Cruder animation
* Character models having longer noses
* Bob wears a white tank top/singlet (in the series he wears a white T-shirt)
* The eldest child is male, and called Daniel. In the broadcast pilot, Tina's dialogue is almost the same as Daniel's and the voice characterization by Dan Mintz is the same, despite being changed to a female character.
* The intro had slower animation due to budget
* Extra dialogue and plot elements were added to the pilot: a scene where the community reacts badly to the restaurant's health safety alert and Bob confronts Hugo about it, and a denouement wrapping up plot elements.
* This extra material expanded the running time from thirteen and a half minutes to twenty-one and a half minutes.
The original pilot can be seen on the DVD release of the first season, released on April 17, 2012.
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Development.
Bob's Burgers first appeared on the development slate at Fox on August 6, 2009. On December 1, 2009, Fox ordered 13 episodes for the first season. On May 17, 2010, Fox placed the series on the primetime slate for the 2010–11 television season. A special preview aired on Thanksgiving on November 25, 2010.
EXECUTIVE PRODUCERS
Section::::Executive producers.
Creator Loren Bouchard serves as the executive producer, alongside developer Jim Dauterive. They have served as executive producers since the first season. Dan Fybel and Rich Rinaldi were promoted to executive producers during season 6.
WRITING
Section::::Writing.
The team of writers includes Loren Bouchard, Jim Dauterive, Scott Jacobson, Lizzie Molyneux, Wendy Molyneux, Holly Schlesinger, Nora Smith, Steven Davis, Kelvin Yu, Dan Fybel, Rich Rinaldi, Jon Schroeder, and Greg Thompson. Past writers on the show include Kit Boss, Aron Abrams, and Mike Benner. H. Jon Benjamin, Rachel Hastings, Justin Hook, Dan Mintz, and Mike Olsen have also written or co-written episodes. After the writing has been completed, the voice actors read the script as written, but later are allowed to improvise lines. The editors and writer decide what improvised lines make the final cut.
VOICE CAST
Section::::Voice cast.
Bob's Burgers has five main cast members: H. Jon Benjamin as Bob Belcher, John Roberts as Linda Belcher, Dan Mintz as Tina Belcher, Eugene Mirman as Gene Belcher, and Kristen Schaal as Louise Belcher.
HALLMARKS
OPENING SEQUENCE
Section::::Hallmarks.
Section::::Opening sequence.
The components of a hamburger fall into place on a white screen, and Bob's hands appear underneath to hold it. The other family members appear around him one at a time, beginning with Linda and ending with Louise. Linda puts her arm around Bob, Tina stands expressionless, Gene plays a sound effect on his keyboard, and Louise poses for the camera. The restaurant then materializes behind them and the neighboring businesses slide into place, with a funeral parlor at screen left, and the street slides into view in front. A "Grand Opening" banner is placed over the door, followed by a series of mishaps: a fire, an infestation of vermin, and a car knocking down a utility pole so that it smashes the front window of the restaurant. A new banner is hung up after each event: "Grand Re-Opening," "Grand Re-Re-Opening," and finally "Grand Re-Re-Re-Opening." The camera then zooms in on the cheese on the burger Bob is holding (or the restaurant sign during Season 1), and the view fades in to the start of the episode.
As with other Fox animated series such as Futurama, The Simpsons, and American Dad!, the show employs the "changing element" running gag in its opening credits. The gag present on Bob's Burgers involves the store located to the right of the restaurant, which has a new, humorously named client in every episode (such as "Betty's Machetes" in "Purple Rain-Union"). Additionally, beginning with Season 2, the pest control van in the sequence has the name of a different company on each episode; the van read "Rat's all Folks! Exterminators" on all episodes of Season 1. On certain episodes, an element is changed for a special night (a flash frame saying "HAPPY HALLOWEEN" was shown during the title sequence of "Fort Night"). 
In an article written by the writers of the show ranking the best 10 musical numbers of the first three seasons, it is explained by show creator and theme composer Loren Bouchard that the ukulele track heard in the theme is an edited version of the first recording he did as well as the first take in 2008. Bouchard explains that if the EQ is taken off the original track, there is noise audible from the nightclub below the apartment he was living in when he recorded the theme.
CREDITS SEQUENCE
Section::::Credits sequence.
The credits sequence of Bob's Burgers often features the Belcher family at work. The scene is the kitchen of Bob's Burgers drawn with a black outline over a white background and the characters in full color, with the credits off to the right hand side. The sequence consists of Bob cooking a burger and Louise and Tina doing prep. Bob places the burger on the plate for Louise to give to Linda, who takes it from the window, and a few seconds later Gene walks through the kitchen wearing his burger costume.
Although the kitchen scene is still the main closing sequence the show uses, beginning in season two the producers began to use different elements from the show in the credits. Some examples:
* In "Ear-sy Rider", the kids ride their bikes down a highway.
* In "Full Bars", Bob and Linda fool around in the kitchen in their Halloween costumes.
* In "An Indecent Thanksgiving Proposal", Linda performs a song she came up with for Thanksgiving, and annoys Bob with it while he is trying to work.
* In "Broadcast Wagstaff School News", Gene, who was given a makeover to resemble Bob, stands next to Bob at the grill. They shoot each other disapproving looks.
* In "", the family works while Gene hugs the titular toilet.
* In "Mother Daughter Laser Razor", Linda and Louise play Lazer Tag and Gene walks through wearing no pants.
* In "The Belchies", "Topsy", and "It Snakes a Village", as well as some other episodes, an extended musical ending revisiting a song or sequence from earlier closes the show.
Other times, the scene will play out as usual, but with something from the episode going on in the background, etc. For instance:
* In "Moody Foodie", deli owner Reggie dances around like Michael Madsen in Reservoir Dogs.
* In "Bad Tina" and "Seaplane!", Tina performs actions she imagined herself doing during the course of the episode.
* In "Burgerboss", the entire scene is animated to look like a video game.
* In "Nude Beach", several customers are nudists from the aforementioned beach.
* In "The Equestranauts", Bob works while wearing his Equestranaut costume and Tina plays with one of her Equestranaut toys. The theme song to the fictional TV series that gave the episode its title is played, with everyone except Bob singing along.
* In "Best Burger", everybody except Bob has chocolate covering their faces, implying that they all went to the "hot fudge car wash" at the food festival where most of the episode took place.
* In "A River Runs Through Bob", Tina performs the Thundergirls anthem and Bob is attacked by squirrels, revisiting elements from earlier in the episode.
* In "Dawn of the Peck", Bob sings and dances to Donna Summer's "Love Is in Control" while he works.
DAILY SPECIAL
Section::::Daily special.
Every episode features one or more "Today's Special" burgers on a chalk board on the wall behind the counter. The name of the special is usually a play on words that indicates what comes on the burger (ex.: "It's Fun to Eat at the rYe M C A Burger": Comes with Rye, Mustard, Cheese, and Avocado). Other "Special" burgers are also mentioned by the family without being written on their chalkboard. The joke is often that the play on words is overly complex or obscure.
HOME MEDIA
Section::::Home media.
The first season through the current season of the show are available on the iTunes Store for download & Hulu. The first 8 seasons are available from Amazon Video.
!Region
!Set title
!Episode count
!Discs
!Time length
!Release date
!Notes
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
Bob's Burgers initially received mixed reviews for season 1, with a Metacritic score of 54 out of 100. However, by season 2, the ratings had reached a score of 78 out of 100, proving a rise in popularity with praises about its "daffy comedic momentum" and how it is "new and fresh." Rotten Tomatoes gave the first season a 63% score based on 27 reviews with an average rating of 6.33/10. The site critical consensus states "A modestly immature workplace cartoon, not without potential, that needs to work on finding its rhythm". The Washington Post described the show as "pointlessly vulgar and derivatively dull", while Reuters stated that "It's unwise – and unnecessary – to launch an animated sitcom on Fox that appears intent to ape the vulgarity quotient of Family Guy." USA Today stated that "Bob's Burgers isn't very tasty" describing the comedy as just "lop[ing] along, stumbling from one tasteless moment to the next" The New York Times described the show as having "a lackadaisical vibe; its humor, no matter how anarchic, slides by in a deadpan monotone."
However, as the first season progressed and concluded and the second began, critics began giving the series praise. Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club has recalled, "...the show was amusing, yes, and there was certainly potential, but it took half a dozen episodes before it really began to meet that potential." Season 2 has a Metacritic score of 78 out 100.
Entertainment Weekly gave the show an A- grade in its review, remarking that "a comedy this well done is very rare indeed". Ain't It Cool News called Bob's Burgers "perhaps the funniest half-hour currently airing on broadcast TV." In its review, CNN called the show "wickedly funny" and said there are "too many highlights to list here". Speaking about the show during its second season, The A.V. Club reviewer Rowan Kaiser said: "After an uneven start, Bob's Burgers is becoming one of television's best comedies!" Since the debut of season two of the series, the show's positive reception has increased.
The A.V. Club voted Bob's Burgers as the 10th best TV show of 2012, the 3rd best show of 2013, the 20th best show of 2014, and the 35th best show of 2015.
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
Primetime Emmy Awards
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings.
After airing, the show became the highest-rated series premiere of the season and also finished 9th in the ratings for the week it aired. Despite this, the ratings went on a slide with ratings expert Bill Gorman of TV by the Numbers calling it a "toss up" for renewal before the series was renewed for a second season which premiered on March 11, 2012.
SYNDICATION
Section::::Syndication.
Adult Swim acquired the rights to air Bob's Burgers in 2013. Episodes air six nights a week, with a 1:30 am airing on Sunday and 8:30 pm airings Monday through Friday. An additional episode airs every Monday through Thursday at 9:00 pm. Adult Swim currently has rights to all five seasons of Bob's Burgers and recently began airing the season five episodes on Mondays.
20th Television began distributing Bob's Burgers to local stations in 2015. The syndication package began airing on its affiliates on the weekend of September 19–20, 2015, and two episodes air each weekend.
The series also premiered on September 26, 2016 on TBS and airs Mondays afternoons (along with Family Guy, American Dad!, and The Cleveland Show) and on Friday nights.
OTHER APPEARANCES
Section::::Other appearances.
On January 6, 2011, some Fatburger locations were re-branded as Bob's Burgers for the day as a promotion. It also offered limited-time offers, such as a free burger giveaway, and a special, "The Thanks a Brunch Burger", on the menu until February 2011. There were also "Bob's Burgers" coupons offered for a free medium Fatburger special. Across the US, four locations were re-branded as Bob's Burgers: in California, New Jersey, Nevada, and Illinois. At least one restaurant location in California continues to use the Bob's Burgers appellation into 2016.
In the Family Guy episode "Space Cadet", the principal shows Peter and Lois a picture of Bob Belcher as a sign that Chris is doing poorly in his Advanced Art class. Peter mutters "I'm very embarrassed", and the principal replies "Yeah, well, someone should be." In "Boopa-dee Bappa-dee", Louise is one of many characters Stewie is turned into by Peter using a remote control. Bob's Burgers is also mentioned on "He's Bla-ack!", as one of the reasons why The Cleveland Show did not succeed.
The season 4 premiere episode of Archer features a crossover where the Belcher family is shown, but Bob is revealed to be Sterling Archer (also voiced by H. Jon Benjamin) in a fugue state. Archer has taken the place of Bob Belcher, with Bob inexplicably missing. The menu board touts the "Thomas Elphinstone Hambledurger, with Manning Coleslaw", a play on amnesiac secret agent Tommy Hambledon, a character in a series of novels by Manning Coles.
"Homerland", the season 25 premiere episode of The Simpsons, features a couch gag in which the Belcher family (skinned yellow according to the standard character coloring of the series) attend a 25th anniversary party in the Simpson family living room with the main characters of their fellow Animation Domination series. Bob made another cameo in the episode "The Girl Code", where a picture of him is shown, and explaining that the restaurant was boycotted by short people due to an offensive Burger of the Day.
Bob makes a cameo appearance in the hour-long The Simpsons-Family Guy crossover "The Simpsons Guy". He appears on the same airplane as Homer and Peter in a cutaway about them being a greater team than the Air Force. Peter remarks to Homer that they have to carry Bob, and then Peter points to Cleveland's plane and says "We let that other guy try and look what happened." Cleveland, repeatedly saying "no", crashes in flames. This is a reference to the poor ratings of Bob's Burgers and the cancellation of The Cleveland Show.
In Aqua Teen Hunger Force, a character previously known as Dr. Eugene Mirman (obviously played by himself) was renamed "Dr. Gene Belcher" in the episode "Hospice". The character's name was revealed on Aqua Teen Hunger Forces creator Dave Willis' Twitter account two hours before the episode. The character had been introduced in 2006, which was five years before Bob's Burgers aired.
Seattle rock band Sleater-Kinney collaborated with Bob's Burgers and its crew for their 2015 single "A New Wave", from the album No Cities to Love. The resultant music video featured the band, animated in the cartoon's style, performing for the Belcher children in Tina's bedroom.
In 2016, The Bob's Burgers Burger Book, edited by series creator Bouchard, was released. There are 75 burger recipes pulled from the fan-based blog "The Bob's Burger Experiment" based on the Specials of the Day that appear on the chalkboard menu in the show.
FILM
Section::::Film.
On October 4, 2017, Fox announced that a Bob's Burgers movie was in the works to be released on July 17, 2020. Creator Bouchard has said the movie will "scratch every itch the fans of the show have ever had," while being appealing to new audiences.
On July 18, 2018, Loren Bouchard said that the script has been submitted and accepted to the studios. The movie will be a musical comedy and will involve Louise and Kuchi Kopi inside her fantasy world as a minor subplot.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
