
VISA POLICY OF THE REPUBLIC OF MACEDONIA
Visitors to the Republic of Macedonia must obtain a visa from one of the Republic of Macedonia diplomatic missions unless they come from one of the visa exempt countries.
Visa policy of the Republic of Macedonia is similar to the visa policy of the Schengen Area. It grants 90-day visa-free entry to all Schengen Annex II nationalities except Colombia, Dominica, Georgia (without a voucher), Grenada, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Palau, Samoa, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. It also grants visa free access to several additional countries – Azerbaijan, Botswana, Cuba, Kazakhstan, Kosovo, Russia and Turkey.
Visitors must hold passports that are valid for at least 3 months from the date of arrival.
VISA POLICY MAP
VISA EXEMPTION
Section::::Visa exemption.
Below is a list of countries whose nationals do not require a visa for visits to Macedonia of up to 90 days:
* All European Union citizens
valign=top
Nationals of the following countries do not require a visa if their passports are endorsed "for public affairs":
}
In addition:
* Holders of a valid Type "C" multiple entry visa or Permanent Residency for the Schengen Area may enter Macedonia for up to 15 days visa free. A temporary residence permit is not accepted. (On some Permanent Residence Cards there is an expiration date, which would be a cause for the Residence Permit Holder not to be allowed to enter Macedonia)
* Holders of a valid UK, Canada or USA visa may enter Macedonia for up to 15 days visa free.
* Holders of UN travel documents do not require a visa.
APPROVAL
Section::::Approval.
In addition to a visa, nationals of Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Bangladesh, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Congo, Egypt, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Philippines, Rwanda, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, Vietnam and Yemen need approval from the Ministry of Interior.
DIPLOMATIC AND OFFICIAL PASSPORTS
Section::::Diplomatic and official passports.
Additionally, only holders of diplomatic and official passports of the following countries do not require visas for Macedonia:
RECIPROCITY
Section::::Reciprocity.
Macedonian citizens can enter some of the countries whose citizens are granted visa-free access to Macedonia without a visa but they require a visa for Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Azerbaijan, Barbados, Brunei, Canada, Ireland, Kazakhstan, Mauritius (grants visa on arrival), Mexico, New Zealand, Paraguay, Saint Kitts and Nevis, South Korea, Taiwan (grants visa on arrival), United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uruguay and Venezuela.
SEE ALSO
* Visa policy in the European Union
* Visa requirements for Macedonian citizens
ANNOTATIONS
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Entry Visa for the Republic of Macedonia
