
LIST OF GAME OF THRONES EPISODES
Game of Thrones is an American fantasy drama television series created by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss. The series is based on the A Song of Ice and Fire novels by author George R. R. Martin. The series takes place on the fictional continents of Westeros and Essos and chronicles the power struggles among noble families as they fight for control of the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms. The series starts when House Stark, led by Lord Eddard "Ned" Stark (Sean Bean) is drawn into schemes against King Robert Baratheon (Mark Addy) when the Hand of the King Jon Arryn (Robert's chief advisor) dies mysteriously.
The series premiered on April 17, 2011, on HBO. David Benioff and D. B. Weiss both serve as executive producers along with Carolyn Strauss, Frank Doelger, Bernadette Caulfield and George R. R. Martin. Filming for the series has taken place in a number of locations, including Croatia, Northern Ireland, Iceland and Spain. Episodes are broadcast on Sunday at 9:00 pm Eastern Time, and the episodes are between 50 and 81 minutes in length. The first seven seasons are available on DVD and Blu-ray.
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview.
EPISODES
SEASON 1 (2011)
Section::::Episodes.
Section::::Season 1 (2011).
In the continent of Westeros, Lord Paramount of the North Eddard "Ned" Stark accepts King Robert Baratheon's offer to serve as "Hand of the King". When his 10-year-old son Bran stumbles on Queen Cersei having sex with Jaime Lannister, her twin brother and a member of the Kingsguard, Jaime pushes Bran out of a tower window, leaving him crippled and comatose. Moving to King's Landing, the capital of the Seven Kingdoms, Ned discovers the truth about Prince Joffrey and his siblings being incestuously fathered by Jaime. When King Robert dies, Ned does not recognize Joffrey as the rightful heir and is beheaded for treason. Meanwhile, Ned's bastard son Jon Snow joins the Night's Watch, an ancient brotherhood sworn to watch over the massive wall in the north, which separates the Seven Kingdoms from hostile tribes known as "Wildlings", and mythological humanoid creatures, the White Walkers. In the continent of Essos, the exiled Viserys Targaryen, son of King Aerys who was deposed by King Robert, marries off his sister Daenerys to the Dothraki warlord Khal Drogo, in exchange for an army to return to Westeros and take the throne. Viserys grows impatient and threatens his sister's life. Drogo kills Viserys, not long before he himself dies. Having been left alone, Daenerys steps into Drogo's funeral pyre with three dragon eggs. By daybreak, she is found unharmed in the ashes, carrying three dragon hatchlings.
SEASON 2 (2012)
Section::::Season 2 (2012).
The Starks have declared war on the Lannisters, with Ned's oldest son Robb winning successive victories and holding Jaime Lannister prisoner. However, his mother Catelyn secretly frees Jaime to ransom her daughters, Sansa and Arya, believed to be captives in King's Landing. Sansa is being regularly abused by her betrothed King Joffrey, while a disguised Arya escapes Lannister forces in Harrenhal with the help of the enigmatic Jaqen H'ghar. Ned's ward Theon Greyjoy sides with his father and seizes Winterfell, the Starks' ancestral home, though Bran and his little brother Rickon manage to escape. Meanwhile, Stannis and Renly Baratheon, brothers of the deceased King Robert, claim the throne for themselves. Having been proclaimed a prophesied hero by Melisandre, a Red Priestess of the Lord of Light, Stannis kills Renly and attacks King's Landing, whose defense is successfully led by Tyrion Lannister, the Hand of the King and Queen Cersei's younger brother. On a ranging beyond the Wall, Jon Snow and his fellow ranger Qhorin Halfhand are captured by Wildlings. Qhorin convinces Jon to kill him in order to gain their trust, while other members of the Watch come under attack by an army of White Walkers and their reanimated corpses. In Essos, Daenerys and her khalasar find refuge in Qarth. The merchant Xaro Xhoan Daxos and the warlock Pyat Pree try but fail to steal her dragons, and Daenerys leaves the city.
SEASON 3 (2013)
Section::::Season 3 (2013).
After Robb breaks his vow to marry one of Lord Walder Frey's daughters, in exchange for his support in the war, Lord Frey arranges the massacre of Robb, his mother, his wife, his unborn child, and his bannermen during a wedding feast. The northern House Bolton, which had liberated Winterfell from Theon at Robb's request, also betrays the Starks. After Robb's death, Lord Roose Bolton is appointed as the new Warden of the North by Lord Tywin. In Dreadfort, the Boltons' ancestral castle, Theon is being tortured by Roose Bolton's bastard son Ramsay Snow. Further north, Jon Snow climbs the Wall with a wilding party and ends up on its south side, but when he is asked to kill an old horse breeder, he fails to prove his loyalty and flees. In the capital, King Joffrey has decided to marry Margaery of House Tyrell, setting Sansa aside. Lord Tywin, however, the head of House Lannister and new Hand of the King, arranges Sansa's marriage with his son Tyrion, to her dismay. Jaime reaches King's Landing, having lost his sword-hand along the way. In Essos, Daenerys acquires "The Unsullied", an army of eunuch slave soldiers, with the help of her dragon Drogon. Joining forces with the "Second Sons", a company of mercenaries, she takes the city of Yunkai and frees its slaves.
SEASON 4 (2014)
Section::::Season 4 (2014).
In King's Landing, Lady Olenna secretly poisons King Joffrey at his wedding with her granddaughter Margaery. Tyrion is falsely accused by his family of the murder. In a trial by combat, Cersei's champion Ser Gregor Clegane defeats Oberyn Martell, the Prince of Dorne representing Tyrion. However, Jaime conspires with Varys, a member of the King's Small Council, and smuggles his brother to Essos. Before fleeing Westeros, Tyrion kills his father Tywin. Petyr Baelish, a devious man and former member of the Small Council, smuggles Sansa into the Vale, ruled by her aunt and his lover, the widowed Lysa Arryn. Baelish marries Lysa, but when she witnesses him kissing Sansa, he kills her. After spending some time trying to reunite with her family, Arya takes a ship bound for Braavos, in Essos. Having returned to the Night's Watch, Jon Snow defends Castle Black against an army of Wildlings, who are superior in strength. The Watch is rescued by the sudden arrival of Stannis Baratheon and his forces. A crippled Bran with newfound powers travels north beyond the Wall with a few companions. Beneath a weirwood tree, he finds the Three-Eyed Raven, an old man with the ability to perceive future and past. In Essos, Daenerys continues her conquest of Slaver's Bay by taking control of Meereen. When, she discovers that her trusted advisor, Ser Jorah Mormont, had spied on her for Robert Baratheon, she exiles him.
SEASON 5 (2015)
Section::::Season 5 (2015).
In King's Landing, Margaery marries the new King Tommen Baratheon, Joffrey's younger brother. The Sparrows, a group of religious fanatics, impose their puritanical views upon the city, imprisoning Margaery, her brother Loras, and Cersei for committing various sins. Jaime travels to Dorne, along with the sellsword Bronn, to take back Myrcella Baratheon, who is betrothed to Trystane Martell. However, the bastard daughters of Oberyn Martell, along with his lover Ellaria Sand, poison Myrcella as an act of vengeance for Oberyn's death. In Winterfell, the new seat of House Bolton, Baelish arranges Sansa's marriage with the now-legitimized son of Roose Bolton, the sadist Ramsay. Stannis's unsuccessful march on Winterfell, which leads to his death, allows Sansa the opportunity to escape with Theon. At the Wall, newly elected Lord Commander of the Night's Watch, Jon Snow forms an alliance with the Wildlings to save them from the White Walkers and their army of reanimated corpses. However, some members of the Watch see Jon as a traitor and stab him to death. Arya arrives in Braavos, where she finds Jaqen H'ghar and begins training with the Faceless Men, a guild of assassins serving the Many-Faced God. In Essos, Tyrion becomes an advisor to Daenerys. When the Sons of the Harpy revolt against her regime, Ser Jorah saves the life of Daenerys, who flees Meereen on Drogon's back.
SEASON 6 (2016)
Section::::Season 6 (2016).
At the Wall, Melisandre resurrects Jon, whom she now believes to be "the prince who was promised". Jon reunites with Sansa and leaves the Night's Watch. Aided by loyalists and the Knights of the Vale, they defeat the Boltons, and Jon is proclaimed the King in the North. Beyond the Wall, Bran trains with the Three-Eyed Raven, but they come under attack by the White Walkers. The Three-Eyed Raven is killed, but he is succeeded by Bran, who escapes with the help of his companions. Bran has a vision revealing that Jon is in fact the child of his deceased aunt Lyanna Stark and crown prince Rhaegar Targaryen. In King's Landing, Cersei uses wildfire to burn the Great Sept, killing the High Sparrow, Margaery, Loras and many others. Tommen kills himself after witnessing the events, and Cersei is crowned Queen. In the Iron Islands, Euron Greyjoy usurps leadership by killing his brother and Theon's father, Balon. Ellaria seizes control of Dorne, and joins Olenna Tyrell in an alliance with Daenerys. In Braavos, Arya continues her training with the Faceless Men, but she runs away, unable to forsake her identity. While away from Meereen, Daenerys takes control of the Dothraki. Returning, she defeats the slavers and forgives Ser Jorah. Daenerys sails for Westeros, joined by Theon and his sister Yara, who also pledge their allegiance.
SEASON 7 (2017)
Section::::Season 7 (2017).
Daenerys arrives in Westeros, and takes up the ancestral seat of House Targaryen, in Dragonstone. She begins forming plans to overthrow Cersei, but Jon arrives to convince her to pause her assault and instead use her forces to save Westeros from the Night King, leader of the White Walkers, and his Army of the Dead. During a mission beyond the Wall to gather evidence of the coming threat, one of Daenerys' dragons is killed and reanimated by the Night King. Jon and Daenerys attempt to persuade Cersei to join their cause, but she secretly uses the ceasefire to bolster her own army in an attempt to increase control over the continent. At Winterfell, Sansa is reunited with her siblings, Arya and Bran. When Lord Protector of the Vale Petyr Baelish begins to turn the Stark children against one another, they work together to uncover his treacherous past and sentence him to death. In a vision, Bran sees that his aunt Lyanna was in fact married to Prince Rhaegar, and that Jon's real name is Aegon Targaryen, making him the true heir to the Iron Throne. After his sister Yara is kidnapped by his uncle Euron, Theon sets out to reclaim his true identity and save her. Having claimed Viserion as his own dragon, the Night King demolishes a section of The Wall, allowing the White Walkers and Army of the Dead to pass into the Seven Kingdoms.
SEASON 8
HOME MEDIA RELEASES
Section::::Home media releases.
! colspan="2" rowspan="2"  Season
! rowspan="2"  Episodes
! colspan="3"  DVD release date
! Region 1
! Region 2
! Region 4
RATINGS
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Game of Thrones – The Viewers Guide on HBO.com
* Making Game of Thrones on HBO.com
