
BO (LOST GIRL)
Bo (nickname for "Ysabeau", her birth name), aka Bo Dennis (surname of adoptive human name "Beth Dennis") ("Bo Jones" as false ID name) is the protagonist of Lost Girl, the Canadian supernatural drama television series that premiered on Showcase on September 12, 2010, and ran for five seasons. Bo is a superhuman bisexual succubus. The character is portrayed by Anna Silk.
In the first episode of the series, It's a Fae, Fae, Fae, Fae World, Bo saved a young human woman named Kenzi from a rapist, and despite their differences the two quickly became friends. Confronted by the local Fae leaders with having to pick a clan, either "Light" or "Dark", Bo declared herself neutral, choosing to side with humans after Kenzi risked her life to find out where Bo had been forcefully taken and then helped Bo break free from a trance by calling out to her. Throughout the first season, Bo learns more about the Fae world and her supernatural nature, while searching for information about her origins. Along the way, Bo also develops romantic relationships with both Dyson, a Light Fae wolf-shapeshifter and police detective in the human police force; and Lauren, a human doctor and scientist in servitude to the Light Fae.
In 2012, "Bo" was No. 35 in the AfterEllen list of Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters; and in 2013, No. 10 in its Top 65 Kick-Ass Female Fantasy Characters. In 2014, "Bo Dennis" was named No. 92 in the British Film Institute list of the top 100 Best Sci-Fi Characters of All Time.
FICTOGRAPHY
CHILDHOOD AND EARLY YEARS
Section::::Fictography.
Section::::Childhood and early years.
Bo is a succubus who grew up in an adopted human family, unaware of her non-human nature and of the Fae world she descended from. In "Raging Fae", she told Kenzi that she began to feel "different" when she entered puberty and didn't know she was not normal until she accidentally killed her high school boyfriend by draining his life energy during her first sexual activity. When she told her parents what had happened, they broke the news to Bo that she had been adopted. Not knowing what she was and what she had done, Bo hated herself and ran away from home, exchanging her previous life for one without family or friends, moving from place to place and assuming a false identity whenever she killed again.
POWERS
Section::::Powers.
As a succubus, she can seduce and manipulate both humans and Fae with the touch of her skin; and has the power to absorb the life force (the "chi", or Qi) of humans and Fae by drawing it out through their mouths. She feeds and heals from oral chi intake, and chi absorbed from the sexual energy created with males or females. At first she could not feed without killing her sexual partners; but with Lauren's help Bo learned to control her sexual drive and chi-drawing powers so that she could have sex with both Fae and humans without injuring or killing them. Although Fae are stronger than humans and can better endure her feeding on them, they are not immune from being drained. Without self-control Bo can render them comatose or dead. In "(Dis)Members Only", Dyson's chi is drained by Bo's succubus birth mother, Aife, and Bo brings him back to life by transferring some of her own life energy into him.
RELATIONSHIPS
THE LOVE TRIANGLE
Section::::Relationships.
Section::::The Love Triangle.
The relationship between Bo and Dyson/Bo and Lauren is known as "The Love Triangle". Initially, there was rivalry between Dyson and Lauren over Bo, as neither one wanted her to be with the other, but they tolerated it. As the series progressed, Dyson and Lauren began to understand each other and the role they played in Bo's life, with the animosity that used to exist between them fading in favor of helping and protecting Bo. What Bo meant to them and they to her was tested throughout the series, with the relationship between Dyson and Bo evolving into an unequivocal friendship, while Lauren and Bo remained in love through hurdles and episodic distance.
DYSON
Section::::Dyson.
A Wolf-Shapeshifter and homicide detective in the human police force. He is over 1,500 years old, very strong, possesses a sharp sense of smell, is acutely knowledgeable about Fae politics, and is scornful towards humans. A member of the Light Fae, his true allegiance is to Trick rather than The Ash. He is the first individual Bo drew chi from that didn't die as a result. Dyson fell in love with Bo while under orders from Trick to keep an eye on her, and is best friends with Hale, his Light Fae detective partner. In "Blood Lines", he involuntarily sacrificed his love for Bo when he offered his wolf to the Norn in return for her giving Bo the strength to defeat her maniacal mother, Aife; but the Norn, who demanded his wolf the first time he supplicated her intervention, realized that his wolf was no longer what he valued most and instead took Dyson's love for Bo and ability to love anyone else; leaving him with the memory of their relationship but unable to feel his passion for her. He made efforts to remain friends with Bo, which was initially awkward when Bo couldn't understand why he had become distant. After being reunited with his old love, Ciara, in "BrotherFae of the Wolves", the two enter into a relationship that was hampered by Dyson's reluctance to reveal his encounter with the Norn and what he had lost in the exchange; however, he eventually admitted to her that he had offered his wolf but it had cost him his being able to love anyone. His ability to love was restored by the Norn in "Into the Dark", after Kenzi threatened to mutilate and cut down her Ancient Tree with a chainsaw. In the first two seasons he showed disdain towards Lauren and there was rivalry between them over Bo, but Bo chose to be in a committed monogamous relationship with Lauren in "Caged Fae" (even though it eventually wasn't feasible because of her succubus feeding needs). After this, the few times Dyson was sexual with Bo was when she needed sexual chi to heal or gain strength — but her being "in love" with Dyson was no longer an element in their relationship. In "Here Comes the Night", the Oracles are sent by the Ancients to find Bo's truth about her blood. To extract truth from someone, Oracles must also deliver truth to them. In order to accomplish this, they try to seduce their targets by appearing as the individual their heart desires most. The Oracle appeared as Dyson and said to Bo, "You chose me first for a reason. Everything we've gone through, everything we've sacrificed ... that was love. And it's still there. It doesn't go away." To which Bo replied "No, it doesn't. But it changes." Their connection settled into friendship, with Dyson willing to sexually accommodate Bo when she needed chi energy. It is revealed in Season 5 that Dyson has a son named Mark, a black panther shapeshifter.
LAUREN LEWIS
Section::::Lauren Lewis.
A Human owned by the Ash as his property, she serves as a doctor and scientist for the Light Fae. She was seduced by Bo during their first meeting and hence fell in love with her. She has extensive knowledge of the different types of Fae and their abilities. Lauren helped Bo learn how to control her powers so that she could have sex with both Fae and humans without hurting or killing them. It is later revealed that she had a human girlfriend, Nadia, who had fallen into a coma five years earlier after contracting a mysterious virus while in the Congo with her. In exchange for her servitude, The Ash offered Lauren access to the Light Fae's laboratory and resources to find a cure for Nadia's condition. Lauren learned from Lachlan in "Masks" that she was tricked by the previous Ash: he ordered a Dark Fae Shaman to curse Nadia into a coma to insure that Lauren would do everything in her power to find an antidote to the fever that was killing Fae, and then pulled her into the Light clan's fold. After Bo (unbeknownst to Lauren) removed the curse, Lauren and Nadia reunited; but their relationship was soon shattered when it was revealed that Nadia had been infected by the Garuda and he could control her mind and body. Bo was forced to kill Nadia when she threatened Lauren's life leaving Lauren devastated. Grieving, Lauren seeks comfort in Bo and the two grow closer emotionally. In the Season 2 finale, Lauren relinquishes her chance for freedom from the Light Fae to stay with Bo, despite encouragement from Dyson to leave while she can.
In "Caged Fae", Bo asks Lauren to be together in a committed relationship. However, in "Delinquents", Tamsin visits Lauren to furtively carry out one of her mercenary tasks, and intentionally provokes Lauren by telling her that she and Bo kissed without Bo feeding from her (not knowing that the kiss was caused by Trick and Stella touching the Dawning invitation machine at the moment they shared a first kiss in "Fae-ge Against The Machine", which made the machine spark, and propelled Tamsin towards Bo to kiss her). Overwhelmed by the all the stress and loss she had experienced, and feeling inadequate in satisfying Bo's succubus nature, Lauren tells Bo that she needs to take a "break" from the relationship. As time passes, however, Bo becomes concerned that it might not be a temporary separation. In "Adventures In Fae-bysitting", a part of Lauren's past is disclosed and we learn that her real name is Karen Beattie and that she is a fugitive wanted by the International Criminal Offences and Criminal Intelligence Bureau. In addition to English she is also fluent in Spanish, French and Swahili. In "Those Who Wander" Lauren feigns being through with Bo in the presence of Dr. Isaac Taft and rejects her to protect Bo, and herself, from him. After this encounter, Bo and Lauren go their separate ways. Lauren then sabotages Taft's plan to extract Dyson's DNA and transfer the cells into him so as to become a Wolf-Shapeshifter, and turns Taft into a human/Cabbit hybrid instead, making him an easy kill for Dyson. She goes missing thereafter. (The conversation that she and Dyson had during a phone call in "Sleeping Beauty School" showed that Dyson was aware of Lauren's motives for subjecting him to the deceptive procedure.) In "Turn to Stone", Lauren reveals to Crystal that she has a brother, they had been inseparable, and decided together "to change the world", but their cause had turned into blowing up pipelines. Lauren knew how to build pipe bombs and made them for her brother to position; however, one location was supposed to have been deserted but wasn't, and eleven people were killed in the explosion. This led Lauren (Karen Beattie) to go on the run, change her identity, and keep running ever since. Lauren confesses that not a day goes by that she doesn't hate herself for what happened. (By the details in the ICOCIB wanted poster, the incident occurred in 1998, when Lauren was 17 or 18 years old.) In "Let the Dark Times Roll", Bo and Lauren are reunited at a Dark Fae party after the passage of a month, during which Lauren's memory of Bo was removed by The Wanderer. They jump into each other's arms and kiss passionately. Lauren told Bo that she had fled for her life after the Una Mens began to kill humans. The Dark Fae (i.e. The Morrigan) came looking for her, offering refuge, protection, and freedom to come and go as she pleased in exchange for working for the clan. When Bo tells Lauren that she can offer her protection by claiming her, Lauren turns her down. After being owned by The Ash for over five years, Lauren doesn't want to be owned by anyone, even Bo. Bo walks away, stunned and bewildered by Lauren's response. In "Dark Horse", Bo and Lauren reconciled after Bo saved Lauren from Massimo. Lauren saw that Bo was wearing the necklace gift from Lauren she had found in "Turn to Stone". When a defiant Lauren tells Bo that she's not afraid of the Fae, Bo admiringly told her, "You really are Dark"; to which Lauren replied, "No, Bo. I'm yours." Bo starts to leave, but turns around and walks back to Lauren and kisses her.
At the start of Season 5, Bo and Lauren have remained good friends, putting behind their previous tensions. In Big in Japan, when Bo felt that she was alone, following Kenzi's departure, Lauren was among those who reassured Bo that she would never be alone, because she stole her heart. In Here Comes the Night, Bo and Lauren made love again since their breakup in Season 3. They were seen by Tamsin, who had initiated a sexual relationship with Bo and thought the two were now "girlfriends". When Bo realized their 'friends with benefits' had been misunderstood she told Tamsin that she did love her, but not in a romantic way. In "End of Faes", Tamsin told Bo that it didn't matter where her body was, because her heart will always be with Lauren; that she and Lauren will always be a couple, even when they were not. Afterwards, Bo stopped Lauren to talk about what happened between them the day before and told her, "There's always going to be a reason for us not to be together. And I don't want to put this off any longer." Bewildered, Lauren simply says, "Oh, Boy." Bo asks, "'Oh, Boy', No. Or 'Oh, Boy', Yes?" Tamsin later tells Lauren that she and Bo should get back together. Tamsin told Lauren "I entered the game and I lost. That's life. The best woman won. I'm over it. You should be, too." Later, Bo, Lauren and Dyson are searching for Mark, Dyson's son. Bo had to leave to find one of the Ancient Fae, Iris, while Lauren and Dyson search for Mark, but before they went different ways, Lauren tells Bo, "Oh, Boy, Yes"; letting her know that she, too, wanted to resume their relationship. In "Rise", as the series comes to an end, Lauren tells Bo that she wants to spend the rest of her life with her, acknowledging mistakes that she would never make again. Both admit their relationship is messy and complicated, but after Lauren assures Bo that she is willing to weather the inevitable complications of their lives, Bo, gladdened, accepts her proposal. They embrace and kiss, this time forever.
FAMILY
FITZPATRICK "TRICK" MCCORRIGAN
Section::::Family.
Section::::Fitzpatrick "Trick" McCorrigan.
Bo's maternal grandfather (revealed near the end of the second season) and father of Aife. Trick is the bartender and owner of the only Fae pub in town, the Dal Riata (aka "The Dal"), which is neutral ground where Light and Dark Fae can freely socialize and find sanctuary. Trick is very powerful: he is a Blood Sage and can alter fate by writing it with his blood. Once known as the Blood King, he forced the truce and wrote the decrees that ended the war between Light and Dark Fae; and though few are now aware of his former position in the Fae hierarchy, he is on equal terms with the Fae Elders. Compared to other Fae, who have contempt for humans, he is tolerant and often fond of humans, even trading away his most prized possession to help save Kenzi's life after she was infected with a lethal Fae virus. He respects Lauren and when necessary seeks her opinion and expertise with matters involving Fae. Trick is extremely reluctant to use his blood powers as it can have unforeseen consequences; for example, his writing a culmination where Aife's maternal instincts emerge and stop her from hurting and killing Bo not only left him weakened and wounded from the loss of blood, but also signaled his whereabouts to an ancient enemy of the Fae, the Garuda.
AIFE
Section::::Aife.
Bo's mother and a powerful succubus. She gave birth to Bo while imprisoned by Hades in Tartarus/Hel. Aife rebelled against the truce between the Light and Dark Fae, and avenged her mother's death by killing a Dark Fae leader. Instead of execution, the Dark punished Aife by condemning her as a captive of the Dark King. He wore a "koushang" amulet to suppress her powers and keep her restrained. Aife goes mad in prison after centuries of torture and abuse.
HADES
Section::::Hades.
Bo's father, an Ancient and ruler of Tartarus (aka Hel), known as the Dark King by the Fae.
MARY DENNIS
Section::::Mary Dennis.
A human and Bo's adoptive mother.
ZEE
Section::::Zee.
Bo's paternal aunt. An Ancient, Zee is the god Zeus and appears in the body of a female.
HERATIO
Section::::Heratio.
Bo's paternal uncle. An Ancient, Heratio is the goddess Hera and appears in the body of a male.
FRIENDSHIPS
KENZI
Section::::Friendships.
Section::::Kenzi.
A young human woman who becomes Bo's best friend and sidekick after Bo saved her from a rapist who had surreptitiously drugged her with a "roofie" in her drink. A pickpocket and scam artist with a long rap sheet, she can speak Russian fluently, possesses excellent street-smarts, and has family connections in organized crime. Kenzi ran away from home and lived on the streets and underground for a long time before meeting Bo. During the "trial" by the local Fae leaders to choose alignment with either the Light or Dark, Bo chose to side with humanity after Kenzi risked her life to discover where Bo had been taken by force and what they were doing to her, and called out to Bo to help her break out of a spell she had been put under during the trial. Kenzi suggested to Bo that she should take advantage of her bewitching powers and neutrality to become a private investigator, with her as partner. She was declared Bo's "property" and pet to allow her to participate within Fae society. Kenzi does not care about fae politics.
HALE SANTIAGO
Section::::Hale Santiago.
A Siren and Dyson's colleague as another Light Fae undercover agent in the human police force. He can pacify, control, and kill humans and Fae alike with his whistling; in addition, he can cure pain and heal wounds with it. He is the son of the leader of one of the three most powerful Light Fae clans, the Clan Zamora, but despite his family's high social status he disdains their social contacts and makes his own way in life (although Bo and Kenzi used his contacts when they needed to infiltrate a high-class Fae event). Hale is good friends with Kenzi, with an undercurrent of mutual attraction gradually developing between them. He helped save Kenzi's life by using his siren's whistle to cauterize her wound in the Season Two finale. In the third season, he became the acting Ash after Lachlan's death.
TAMSIN
Section::::Tamsin.
A Valkyrie and Dark Fae bounty hunter introduced in Season 3. She creates doubt and intimidation in her victims, can awaken a comatose person, senses from a cadaver the fear someone experienced before death, kills with mental power, and reincarnates into several life cycles until the last one. In "SubterrFaenean", Tamsin was sent by The Morrigan and Hale (as acting Ash) to work together with Dyson in a Fae clan exchange program. Their mission was to solve the murder of a Dark Fae that was drained of his chi outside the Dal Riata. At first determined to find Bo responsible, Tamsin becomes friendly towards her and defies The Morrigan. However, she had secretly accepted a contract by The Wanderer to find Bo and bring her to him. To capture her, Tamsin procured one hair from someone Bo loved (Lauren), two from someone she trusted (Dyson), and three from Bo's own head, and mixed them in a rune glass to create a special elixir that, when Tamsin threw the vial at Bo's feet and it shattered, the liquid marked Bo so that she could be "collected" by The Wanderer's agents and transported through transcending planes. Tamsin seduces Dyson in "End Of A Line" when he becomes low-spirited about Bo's questionable relationship with Rainer. As time passes, Tamsin becomes Bo's roommate in Season 5 and falls in love with her. In "It's Your Lucky Fae", she offers herself sexually to Bo as a birthday gift and Bo accepts her. However, later in "Here Comes the Night", when Tamsin tells Bo that she knows Bo's heart lies with her and that she is in love with her, Bo tells Tamsin that she did care about her and loved her, but "not like that".
RAINER
Section::::Rainer.
Bo met Rainer on the Death Train and they became lovers. In "Origin", to save his life and protect her family when she confronted her father, the Dark King and Lord of Darkness, Bo united with Rainer in a handfasting ceremony.
SEE ALSO
* List of Lost Girl characters
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Lost Girl at Prodigy Pictures Inc.
* Lost Girl at Syfy (U.S.)
* Lost Girl at Canada Media Fund
* Lost Girl official Twitter
* Lost Girl official page on Facebook
* Lost Girl at Lost Girl Writers Twitter
* Lost Girl at Lost Girl Official Merchandise (Gold Label)
* Lost Girl at BO SERIES INC. (Giant Ape Media)
* Lost Girl at Lost Girl: The Official Site (FUNimation)
* Lost Girl at Funimation: Take Lost Girl Home
