
A MONSTER CALLS
A Monster Calls is a low fantasy novel written for children and adults by Patrick Ness, from an original idea by Siobhan Dowd, illustrated by Jim Kay and published by Walker in 2011. Set in present-day England, it features a boy who struggles to cope with the consequences about his mother's illness. He is repeatedly visited in the middle of the night by a monster who tells stories. Dowd was terminally ill with cancer herself when she started the story and died before she could write it.
Ness and Kay won the Carnegie Medal and the Greenaway Medal in 2012, the "year's best" children's literary awards by the British librarians (CILIP). A Monster Calls is the only book whose author and illustrator, whether two persons or one, have won both Medals.
The novel was adapted into the 2016 film of the same name.
ORIGIN
Section::::Origin.
Siobhan Dowd conceived the novel while she had cancer. She discussed it and contracted to write it with editor Denise Johnstone-Burt at Walker Books, who also worked with Patrick Ness. After Dowd's death in August 2007, Walker arranged for Ness to write the story. Later, Walker and Ness arranged for Jim Kay to illustrate it, but Ness and Kay did not meet until after it was published in May 2011.
After winning the Carnegie, Ness discussed the writing with The Guardian newspaper: 
Kay was selected based on illustrating one scene, solicited by art director Ben Norland: 
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
Thirteen-year-old Conor O'Malley awakens from the same nightmare he has been experiencing for the past few months, "the one with the darkness and the wind and the screaming".
At seven minutes after midnight ("12:07"), a voice calls to him from outside his bedroom window, which overlooks an old church and its graveyard sheltered by a yew tree. Walking to the window, Conor meets the monster who called, a towering mass of branches and leaves formed in a human shape from the yew tree. The monster is intrigued that Conor is not afraid of it and insists that Conor summoned it. The monster claims to be a version of the green man and warns that it will tell Conor three true stories, after which Conor must tell a story of his own, and if it is not true, the monster will eat him.
The monster continues to meet Conor, almost always at 12:07 am or pm, to tell its stories, which all involve other occasions the monster was summoned.
Between its tales, which aim to demonstrate the complications inherent in humans, it is revealed that Conor's mother is undergoing chemotherapy and has been afflicted with terminal cancer for the past year. Conor is isolated and alone. His flaky father uses his new family in the USA as an excuse to be detached and unsupportive. His distant relationship with his pushy and cold grandmother provides no comfort either. Conor is a victim of bullying at school and he has distanced himself from all social contact other than that of the monster. As the story progresses, his mother's condition worsens and Conor's encounters with the monster have escalating consequences. The story also mentions an alleged "Pit Monster" and "Sky Monster".
At the end of the book we find out why the monster has been coming and about the nightmare Conor is so afraid of, which is him holding onto his mother's arms gripping her tightly as she's about the to fall off a cliff and Conor loosens his grip, lets his mother fall purposely, though he could have held on to her longer. The monster came, for Conor to confess the truth to his mother about how he wanted her to die so she didn't have to suffer and he wouldn't feel so isolated and to end all pain for them, and by doing so Conor could finally let his mother go.
And at 12:07, the time the monster usually came, Conor's mother passed and so did all their pain.
THE FOUR STORIES
THE FIRST STORY
Section::::The Four Stories.
Section::::The first story.
This story also discusses the need for humans to lie to themselves, such as the prince who wholeheartedly believes that the queen is responsible for his fiance's death despite her being murdered by his hand, and their willingness to believe those lies for their own comfort and happiness.
THE SECOND STORY
Section::::The second story.
At the end of the story, Conor participates as the monster destroys the parson's house, to waken and discover that he has vandalized his grandmother's sitting room, shattering many valuable and beloved items beyond repair.
THE THIRD STORY
Section::::The third story.
As this story is told, Conor is briefly possessed by the monster and physically and violently assaults Harry, the school bully, throwing him across the dining hall, putting the boy in the hospital.
THE FOURTH STORY
Section::::The fourth story.
Conor must confront his nightmare to tell the fourth story or face being engulfed by smoke and flames
CRITICAL RECEPTION
Section::::Critical reception.
A Monster Calls received widespread acclaim. Philip Pullman, author of the fantasy trilogy His Dark Materials, praised the novel as "compelling ... powerful and impressive", Similarly, New York Times critic Jessica Bruder wrote "this is one profoundly sad story" and called the novel "a potent piece of art," applauding Kay's illustrations. Daniel Hahn from The Independent also praised A Monster Calls, saying that it was "brave and beautiful, full of compassion," and that "the result trembles with life." Publisher's Weekly gave it a starred review and called it "a singular masterpiece."
AWARDS
Section::::Awards.
Ness and Kay won the Carnegie and Greenaway Medals for writing and illustration, recognising the year's best work published in the UK. The double win alone is unprecedented in more than fifty years since the illustration award was established. 
A Monster Calls also won the British Children's Book of the Year, voted by an "academy of 750 book industry experts";
the Red House Children's Book Award, overall, a national award voted by British children;
and the Kitschies Red Tentacle award for speculative fiction, best novel published in the UK.
In the U.S., the American Library Association magazine Booklist named it the "Top of the List" for 2011 youth fiction.
Daily newspapers including The Independent, 
Chicago Sun-Times, 
and The Wall Street Journal 
named it to year-end "Best" lists.
FILM ADAPTATION
Section::::Film adaptation.
On 5 March 2014, Focus Features bought the film rights to the book and at the time committed $20 million in P&A (prints and advertising) to release the movie. On 9 April 2014, it was announced that a film based on the book would be released by Focus Features on 14 October 2016. The film was directed by Juan Antonio Bayona and written by the book's author Patrick Ness. On 23 April 2014, Felicity Jones joined the film to play the boy's mother. On 8 May, Liam Neeson joined the film to voice the Monster. On 18 August, Sigourney Weaver joined to play the boy's grandmother. On 19 August, Toby Kebbell also joined the film to play the boy's father.
The film premiered on September 10, 2016 at the 2016 Toronto International Film Festival. It was released in Spain on October 7, 2016 and was released in the United States on January 5, 2017.
STAGE PRODUCTION
Section::::Stage production.
On 24 October 2017, Patrick Ness announced via Instagram that a stage adaptation was being made. Sally Cookson was later announced as the director. The play was previewed at the Bristol Old Vic on 7 July before having its first run at The Old Vic, as part of their 200th anniversary season, from 17 July.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* —immediately, first US edition
