
LYKAN HYPERSPORT
The Lykan Hypersport is a Lebanese limited production sports car manufactured by W Motors, a United Arab Emirates based company, founded in 2012 in Lebanon with the collaboration of Lebanese, and Italian engineers. It is the first sports car to be designed and produced indigenously in the Middle East. 
The production of the car was limited to a planned total of just seven units. The first pre-production Lykan HyperSport was unveiled to the public at the Qatar Motor Show in February 2013.
PRICING AND SALES
Section::::Pricing and sales.
At 3.4 million, the Lykan HyperSport was the third most expensive production car at time of its production. The HyperSport is the first car to have headlights with embedded jewels; they contain titanium LED blades with 420 diamonds (15cts).; although buyers have a selection of rubies, diamonds, yellow diamonds, and sapphires to be integrated into the vehicle's headlights at purchase based on the colour choice. The car also uses a holographic display system on the centre console with interactive motion features, as well as gold stitching on the seats. There is a discrepancy among sources as to how many cars have been sold, with reports varying from four to seven sales. At least two of the cars have been sold, one to an anonymous buyer, as revealed in a YouTube video by W Motors. In June 2015, the Abu Dhabi police force purchased a Lykan HyperSport. The Abu Dhabi Police car is included in the total of seven, meaning only six were available for purchase by customers.
SPECIFICATIONS
POWERTRAIN
Section::::Specifications.
Section::::Powertrain.
The Lykan HyperSport is powered by a 3.7 litre (3,746cc) twin-turbocharged flat-six engine developed by Ruf Automobile, producing a maximum power output of at 7,100 rpm and of torque at 4,000 rpm. The engine has a mid-rear mounted position and transfers power to the rear wheels.
TRANSMISSION
Section::::Transmission.
The Lykan HyperSport was available with either a 6-speed sequential manual or a 7-speed dual-clutch PDK transmission. The transmission is paired with a limited-slip differential and is mounted transversely at the rear of the car.
SUSPENSION
Section::::Suspension.
The Lykan HyperSport uses MacPherson strut suspension on the front axle, and multi-link suspension with horizontal coil over shock absorbers at the rear axle. Anti-roll bars are also installed at both axles.
WHEELS
Section::::Wheels.
The Lykan HyperSport is equipped with forged aluminum wheels with diameters of 19 inches at the front and 20 inches at the rear. The tires are Pirelli P Zeros with codes of 255/35 ZR 19 for the front and 335/30 ZR 20 for the rear. The brakes are ventilated ceramic composite discs, with a diameter of 380mm each and using six-piston aluminium callipers at the front and rear.
PERFORMANCE
Section::::Performance.
The manufacturer claims a top speed of , depending on the gear ratio setup. The car has claimed acceleration times of 2.8 seconds for 0-100 km/h (0-62 mph) and 9.4 seconds for 0-200 km/h (0-125 mph), though no independent tests have been conducted. There was a demonstration of the car by W Motors in 2013 in Dubai, in which they claim to have recorded the car's performance.
MEDIA
Section::::Media.
The Lykan HyperSport is featured in the film Furious 7, and the video games Project CARS, Driveclub, , , Asphalt Nitro, Forza Motorsport 6, Forza Horizon 3, Forza Motorsport 7, , CSR Racing and CSR Racing 2. The Lykan can also be briefly seen in the second Fate of the Furious trailer, however, the Lykan does not make an appearance, the footage is actually from the seventh instalment in the series, Fast and Furious 7.
GALLERY
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Website
