
EMBASSY OF THE UNITED KINGDOM, PYONGYANG
The British Embassy Pyongyang is the British sovereign's diplomatic mission to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, representing the United Kingdom and the United Kingdom's interests. It is located in the Munsu-dong compound (in the Taedonggang District), where most of the diplomatic missions to North Korea are located, with the exception of the Russian and Chinese missions.
The British Embassy is situated in the Munsu-dong diplomatic compound, sharing the building with the German, French and Swedish missions to North Korea, in what was originally the East German mission and was transferred over for use by the government of the present Germany upon German reunification. The former East German embassy was established at a time when North Korea relied almost exclusively but equally on both the Soviet Union and other Warsaw Pact and Comecon Countries (of which East Germany were members of both) as well as on China for external trade.
HISTORY
Section::::History.
Britain and North Korea had no formal diplomatic relations until 12 December 2000, when diplomatic missions in London and Pyongyang were established. James Hoare was chargé d'affaires from 2001–2002 until a permanent ambassador was appointed by the British government. and the first full time accredited British diplomat was James Warren. The embassy itself opened in July 2001 and the first ambassador, David Slinn, arrived in November 2002. There have since been a further five ambassadors, including present ambassador Alastair Morgan.
INCIDENTS
Section::::Incidents.
On 5 April 2013 the North Korean government advised the British Embassy, and all other missions, that the safety of their missions could not be assured past 10 April 2013. This was part of the North Korean government's response to United Nations Security Council Resolution 2094 and deterioration of relations between North Korea and the United States.
SEE ALSO
* List of ambassadors of the United Kingdom to North Korea
* List of diplomatic missions in North Korea
* Foreign relations of North Korea
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* British Embassy Pyongyang – gov.uk
