
LIST OF ATTACK ON TITAN EPISODES
Attack on Titan is an anime series adapted from the manga of the same title by Hajime Isayama. It is set in a world where humanity lives inside cities surrounded by enormous walls due to the Titans, gigantic humanoid beings who devour humans seemingly without reason. The story follows the adventures of Eren Jaeger and his two childhood friends, Armin Arlert and Mikasa Ackermann, whose lives are changed forever after a Colossal Titan breaches the wall of their home town. Vowing revenge and to reclaim the world from the Titans, Eren and his friends join the Scout Regiment, an elite group of soldiers who fight Titans.
Produced by IG Port's Wit Studio and directed by Tetsurō Araki, Attack on Titan was broadcast on the Mainichi Broadcasting System from April 7 to September 29, 2013, and later aired on Tokyo MX, FBS, TOS, HTB, TV Aichi and BS11. Both Funimation and Crunchyroll have streamed the series with subtitles on their respective websites. Funimation has also licensed the anime for home video release in 2014. Episode 1 of the English version premiered at Anime Boston, with other episodes put on Funimation's subscription services. On television of the series has broadcast weekly on Adult Swim's Toonami block on May 3, 2014, starting at 11:30 p.m. EST.
From episode 1 to 13, the anime's opening theme song is by Linked Horizon and the ending theme song is by Yōko Hikasa. From episode 14 to 25, the anime's opening theme song is by Linked Horizon and the ending theme song is "great escape" by Cinema Staff. The opening themes were collected on Linked Horizon's single "Jiyū e no Shingeki" which sold over 100 thousand copies in its first week of sales.
A second season aired from April 1 to June 17, 2017 on MBS and other television networks. Funimation and Crunchyroll streamed the second season on their respective websites, while Adult Swim aired a dubbed version. The opening theme song is by Linked Horizon and the ending theme song is by Shinsei Kamattechan.
On June 17, 2017, a third season was announced at the close of the second season's final episode, with a release date slated for July 23, 2018. A trailer for the third season was released on April 27, 2018 along with confirmation for a 24-episode long season. After 12 episodes, Season 3 was confirmed to be in hiatus until it returns with half of the episodes on April 2019. Adult Swim is scheduled to air the English version of the third season, starting on August 18, 2018. The opening theme for the third season is "Red Swan" by Yoshiki featuring Hyde, and the ending theme song is by Linked Horizon.
SERIES OVERVIEW
EPISODE LIST
Section::::Episode list.
Each episode contains one or two panels entitled "Information Available for Public Disclosure" presenting data about human society or the Titans.
SEASON 1 (2013)
SEASON 2 (2017)
SEASON 3 (2018)
SPECIAL EPISODES
OVA EPISODES
Section::::Special episodes.
Section::::OVA episodes.
The following bonus original video animation episodes were released alongside select volumes of the manga.
BONUS SHORTS
Section::::Bonus shorts.
 is a series of flash animated gag shorts included with the Blu-ray Disc/DVD releases, featuring the characters in chibi form based on designs by Yuupon.
SEE ALSO
* List of Attack on Titan chapters
* List of Attack on Titan novels
NOTES
REFERENCES
Sources
References
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Attack on Titan on Funimation
* Attack on Titan on Crunchyroll
