
DERRICK COLEMAN (AMERICAN FOOTBALL)
Derrick Lamont Coleman (born October 18, 1990) is an American football fullback for the Arizona Cardinals of the National Football League (NFL). He was signed as an undrafted free agent by the Minnesota Vikings in 2012. He played college football for the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Coleman is the first legally deaf offensive player in the NFL.
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life.
Coleman became legally deaf when he was three years old. He attended Troy High School in Fullerton, California, and played college football for UCLA.
PROFESSIONAL CAREER
MINNESOTA VIKINGS
Section::::Professional career.
Section::::Minnesota Vikings.
Coleman went undrafted, then signed as an undrafted free agent with the Minnesota Vikings on April 28, 2012. He was waived by the Vikings in August.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS
Section::::Seattle Seahawks.
Coleman was signed by the Seattle Seahawks in December 2012. He made the 2013 season cut after the fourth preseason game and thus was added to the 53-man roster. In week one's game between the Seahawks and the Carolina Panthers, Coleman had three catches for 30 yards. Coleman scored his first NFL touchdown on December 2, 2013 on Monday Night Football against the New Orleans Saints off of a ricocheted ball from Kellen Davis. Coleman was a part of the Seahawks Super Bowl XLVIII championship team. On October 15, 2015, Coleman was suspended indefinitely after an arrest on hit and run charges, but the suspension was lifted on October 19, after a team investigation.
ATLANTA FALCONS
Section::::Atlanta Falcons.
On March 21, 2017, Coleman signed with the Atlanta Falcons. On September 10, he made his Falcons debut in the 23–17 victory over the Chicago Bears.
ARIZONA CARDINALS
Section::::Arizona Cardinals.
On May 9, 2018, Coleman signed with the Arizona Cardinals.
PERSONAL LIFE
Section::::Personal life.
In January 2014, Coleman was featured in a widely praised commercial for Duracell batteries. The commercial inspired twin sisters Riley and Erin Kovalcik, who also wear hearing aids, to write him a letter of support. After exchanging letters, Coleman and Duracell decided to invite the Kovalcik family to watch the Super Bowl XLVIII in person on February 2, 2014.
Coleman is a Christian and has spoken about his faith, saying, "I always say that God blessed me this morning and I can do what I do."
LEGAL INCIDENTS
Section::::Legal incidents.
On October 15, 2015, Coleman was driving his Dodge Ram erratically in Bellevue, Washington. After accelerating to over 60 mph, he slammed into back of another vehicle, injuring the 56-year old driver, Kristopher Fine. It is alleged that Coleman took off on foot from the scene of the accident but was spotted and detained by police within 10 minutes. Police said that Coleman claimed he had smoked spice, a synthetic form of marijuana, about an hour before the incident. On October 6, 2016, he pled guilty to vehicular assault and hit-and-run charges. On October 15, 2016, he was ordered to undergo 240 hours of community service and required to be under community supervision for 12 months. Under the agreement, he was also required to pay the victim restitution and property damages. After being sentenced, he was also notified that if he were to sign with a team in the NFL, he would be required to serve a four-game suspension, which occurred on October 14, 2016.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* UCLA Bruins bio
* Seattle Seahawks bio
