
HOW TO GET AWAY WITH MURDER
How to Get Away with Murder is an American drama television series that premiered on ABC on September 25, 2014. The series was created by Peter Nowalk, and produced by Shonda Rhimes and ABC Studios. The series airs on ABC as part of a night of programming, all under Rhimes's Shondaland production company.
Viola Davis stars as Annalise Keating, a law professor at a prestigious Philadelphia university who, with five of her students, becomes entwined in a murder plot. The show features an ensemble cast with Alfred Enoch, Jack Falahee, Aja Naomi King, Matt McGorry, and Karla Souza as Keating's students, Charlie Weber and Liza Weil as her employees, and Billy Brown as a detective with the Philadelphia Police Department, who is Annalise's lover. From season three onward, Conrad Ricamora was promoted to the main cast after recurring heavily in the first two seasons.
For her portrayal, Davis has received critical acclaim; she became the first black woman to win the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, also winning two Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Drama Series, and the Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Drama Series. Davis has also received nominations from the Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress in a Television Series, the Critics' Choice Awards for Best Actress in a Drama Series, and the Television Critics Association at the TCA Awards for Individual Achievement in Drama. Other cast members have also received recognition for their performances, with Enoch and King being nominated by the NAACP as Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series at the GLAAD Awards.
On May 11, 2018, ABC renewed the series for a fifth season, which premiered on September 27, 2018.
SERIES OVERVIEW
SEASON 1
Section::::Series overview.
Section::::Season 1.
Annalise Keating is a prominent criminal defense attorney and law professor at Middleton University in Philadelphia. She selects five of her first year students to intern at her firm: Wes Gibbins, Connor Walsh, Michaela Pratt, Asher Millstone, and Laurel Castillo (The Keating 5). They work with Annalise's employees, Frank Delfino and Bonnie Winterbottom, an associate lawyer. As Season 1 introduces occasional clients for Keating, it explores two related murders through both flashback and flashforward sequences: Lila Stangard, mistress of Annalise's husband and a student at Middleton, and then Sam Keating, Annalise's husband, who was killed by Annalise's interns.
The first nine episodes alternate between the present-day timeline in medias res, depicting Wes, Connor, Michaela, and Laurel covering up Sam's murder by disposing of his body, and flashbacks detailing the course of events leading up to Sam's death, including Annalise's becoming involved in the Lila Stangard investigation, at Wes' urging, leading her to discover Sam's affair and creating suspicion that he killed Lila. The final six episodes explore Annalise's attempt to help her interns cover up Sam's murder and legally implicate Sam in Lila's death, and flashbacks to Lila's final moments before her murder.
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2.
The first nine episodes focus on Annalise's defense of Caleb and Catherine Hapstall, who were accused of torturing and murdering their adoptive parents. Wes, in the meantime, teams up with Rebecca's foster brother to try and find Rebecca. Connor struggles with his relationship with Oliver, while Asher works with A.D.A. Emily Sinclair, in order to protect his secrets. In the mid-season finale, Sinclair is murdered, and Annalise helps cover it up, at the expense of her being shot in the stomach by Wes.
The second part of the season focuses on Wes' investigation of his mother's suicide 10 years ago; flashbacks reveal Annalise's involvement with Wes' mother's suicide. The season ends with Annalise's finding out that Frank was responsible for the car crash that killed her baby, and Annalise sends him away. Michaela and Asher hook up, and Wes meets with his biological father right before the latter is shot dead by an unknown shooter.
SEASON 3
Section::::Season 3.
In the aftermath of Wallace Mahoney's death, all five of the students attempt to move on. A new mystery arises around the burning down of Annalise's house and who was found dead inside. The events leading up to it involve Annalise's starting a free legal clinic and struggling with alcoholism. Oliver starts working for Annalise, and he leaves Connor when becoming disgusted with himself for rejecting Connor's Stanford acceptance. Michaela and Asher's relationship starts to progress, as does Wes and Laurel's, and Frank starts working to atone for the death of Annalise's child. Ultimately, it is revealed that it was Wes who died, and that he was killed before the fire. Annalise is arrested for Wes' death. Frank attempts to help Annalise by confessing to killing Wes. It is further revealed that Wes' death was commissioned by Laurel's father, who disapproved of their relationship.
SEASON 4
Section::::Season 4.
In season four, Annalise works with a therapist, Dr. Isaac Roa, to see through her recovery from alcoholism. She initially cuts ties with Bonnie (who moves to the DA's office as an assistant district attorney reporting to DA Todd Denver) and the interns, gets a woman with a long rap sheet freed from jail, and then commits to a major class action against the state for miscarriages of justice caused by an underfunded public defender's office. Laurel deduces that her father, Jorge Castillo, is responsible for Wes' murder and hatches a scheme to steal incriminating evidence from his law firm with the help of Michaela, Oliver, Frank, and Asher. During the data heist, their classmate Simon (Behzad Dabu) accidentally shoots himself with Laurel's gun, leading to Asher's arrest, and Laurel goes into premature labor after being accidentally struck by Frank. Annalise successfully saves the baby. However, Jorge claims custody of his grandchild by submitting evidence of Laurel's past addictions and history of mental illness to a judge. Laurel's mother arrives unexpectedly to "help" Laurel fight against her father, and Frank and Bonnie uncover a mysterious link between Laurel's mother and both Wes and his killer, Dominic. Meanwhile, Annalise searches for alternative ways to win her class action lawsuit. On January 3, 2018, a crossover with Scandal was announced which aired on March 1, 2018.
SEASON 5
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Viola Davis as Annalise Keating
* Billy Brown as Nate Lahey
* Alfred Enoch as Wes Gibbins (main season 1–3; guest season 4)
* Jack Falahee as Connor Walsh
* Katie Findlay as Rebecca Sutter (main season 1; guest season 2)
* Aja Naomi King as Michaela Pratt
* Matt McGorry as Asher Millstone
* Karla Souza as Laurel Castillo
* Charlie Weber as Frank Delfino
* Liza Weil as Bonnie Winterbottom
* Conrad Ricamora as Oliver Hampton (main season 3–present; recurring seasons 1–2)
* Rome Flynn as Gabriel Maddox (main season 5; guest season 4)
* Amirah Vann as Tegan Price (main season 5; recurring season 4)
* Timothy Hutton as Emmett Crawford (season 5)
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production.
Section::::Development.
On August 19, 2013, ABC bought from Shondaland Productions the original concept, produced by Shonda Rhimes and Betsy Beers. The script for the pilot episode was written by Grey's Anatomy supervising producer Peter Nowalk. ABC ordered the pilot on December 19, 2013. On May 8, 2014, ABC picked up the pilot to series for the 2014–15 television season. At the Television Critics Association Press Tour in July 2014, it was announced that How to Get Away with Murder will be a limited series with only 15 or 16 episodes per season. The smaller size of episode count stems from the deal for the series star Davis. On October 9, 2014, ABC picked up the series for a full season of 15 episodes.
The series was renewed for a second season on May 7, 2015, by ABC. The show was effectively confirmed as earning a second-season renewal for the 2015-16 season via a promo succeeding the first-season finale and an earlier statement by Viola Davis also confirming the renewal at the close of shooting for the first season. It would contain 15 episodes, like the previous season. Production began on May 21, 2015, with Shonda Rhimes announcing on Twitter that Peter Nowalk and his writers were in full swing mapping the second season. The table read for the premiere occurred on July 14, 2015, with the title of the episode being revealed at the same time. Entertainment Weekly reported on July 23, 2015, that the identity of Rebecca's killer would be revealed in the season premiere. A promotional poster was released over a month before the season premiere, on August 17, 2015.
The series was renewed for a third season on March 3, 2016, along with several other shows by ABC. It was announced that the third season will premiere on September 22, 2016. Production began on May 27, 2016, when showrunner Peter Nowalk announced on Twitter that the writer staff were in full swing mapping and writing the third season. The table read for the premiere happened on July 6, 2016, with filming starting a week later. A promotional poster showcasing Viola Davis as Annalise Keating, was released on August 9, 2016. ABC released a promo for the third season on August 29, 2016.
The series was renewed for a fourth season on February 10, 2017, by ABC.
The series was renewed for a fifth season on May 11, 2018, by ABC, which premiered on September 27, 2018.
WRITING
Section::::Writing.
In an interview with Entertainment Weekly, showrunner Peter Nowalk talked about what will happen in the third season regarding Frank's disappearance; he commented: "Yes, I can see the three-piece suits and the hair product all falling apart. It's more what Frank feels about himself". When talking about the trust between Annalise and Frank, Nowalk said: "...Frank has two choices: To run away and hope she never catches him, just to cut bait; or he can try to win his way back. That's a long road." Charlie Weber commented on Frank's whereabouts as he said to Entertainment Weekly "I think he's hiding, and I think he's alone. If he does have a lifeline, I don't think it's Laurel."
Regarding Laurel, Nowalk said that Laurel's backstory with her family will be explored in the upcoming season, "I feel like it's very present. The promise of our show is that we won't dangle things out too long. The likelihood is yes. We've raised that question too many times not to answer it sooner than later." Michaela's backstory will also be explored as Nowalk said "We have so much to explore with her. Aja is so talented. I'm just excited to really delve into her personal life next year." Talking to The Hollywood Reporter Nowalk said that the show will explore both Annalise and Nate's relationship and both their families.
CASTING
Section::::Casting.
On January 21, 2014, Matt McGorry was the first to be announced as a regular cast member, playing a law student. Throughout February and March 2014, other roles were announced as cast: Aja Naomi King, Jack Falahee, Alfred Enoch and Karla Souza as law students; Katie Findlay as a drug-dealing student; Charlie Weber as a law associate to Professor Keating; Billy Brown as Professor Keating's extra-marital love interest; veteran actor and producer Tom Verica as Professor Keating's husband; and Liza Weil as one of the professor's two associates.
On February 25, 2014, it was announced that Shonda Rhimes had cast Viola Davis in the show's leading role of Professor Annalise Keating. On August 11, 2014, it was announced that Orange is the New Black alum Alysia Reiner was cast as a prosecutor who would be going up against Annalise. On November 4, 2014, it was announced that Oscar winner Marcia Gay Harden was cast in the second half of the first season for a secret recurring role. On December 15, 2014, it was announced that Oscar nominee and Emmy winner Cicely Tyson would appear in an episode in the second half of the season.
It was announced on July 14, 2015, that the second season would introduce several new characters, including a family consisting of Caleb, Catherine and Helena Hapstall. Katie Findlay will return to play the character Rebecca Sutter, who was killed in the first-season finale. On July 22, 2015, it was announced that Kendrick Sampson, known from The Vampire Diaries will join the cast in the second season and will be introduced in the season premiere. On July 31, 2015, TVLine reported that Famke Janssen was cast as a brilliant, revered defense attorney for a multi-episode arc and will first appear in the season premiere.
Matt Cohen was announced on August 11, 2015, to recur in the second season as Levi, who is described as a sexy, edgy working class guy. He will first appear in the second episode and will appear in a total of three episodes. On August 31, 2015, Variety reported that Amy Okuda will play a recurring role, but details on Okuda's part were being kept under wraps. Sherri Saum was announced to have been cast as a guest star on September 30, 2015. On January 14, 2016, it was announced that Wilson Bethel, Adam Arkin and Roxanne Hart would be joining the show to play the Mahoney family. Bethel will play Charles Mahoney, the Ivy League-educated son, with Arkin playing his father Wallace and Hart playing his mother Sylvia.
After the second-season finale, it was announced that Dexter-alum Lauren Vélez had been cast in a recurring role as the President of Middleton University. The role was described as "self-assured, friendly, warm and diplomatic." It was reported on August 6, 2016, that Esai Morales and Amy Madigan had been added to the show as guest stars for the third season. Deadline announced on August 31, 2016, that Mary J. Blige had landed a guest role in the third season.
On June 7, 2018, it was announced that Rome Flynn, who made a cameo appearance as Gabriel Maddox at the end of the fourth-season finale, was promoted to regular status for the upcoming fifth season. On July 18, it was reported that Amirah Vann, who recurred as Tegan Price during the fourth season, would also join the regular cast for the fifth season. On July 30, 2018, it was announced that Timothy Hutton had been cast as series regular for season 5.
FILMING
Section::::Filming.
The pilot episode was filmed in Los Angeles, California, at the University of Southern California; in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, at Bryn Mawr College; and in Collegeville, Pennsylvania, at Ursinus College. It was directed by Michael Offer. Production began on May 21, 2015, with Shonda Rhimes announcing on Twitter that Peter Nowalk and his writers were in full swing mapping the second season. The table read for the premiere occurred on July 14, 2015, with the title of the episode being revealed at the same time.
RECEPTION
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Critical response.
The first season of How to Get Away with Murder received positive reviews, with most praising Viola Davis' performance. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has an approval rating of 85% based on 55 reviews, with an average rating of 7.1/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "How to Get Away with Murder isn't conceptually original, but it delivers thrills with melodramatic twists and a captivating lead." Metacritic gave season one a score of 68 out of 100, based on 30 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews."
Mary McNamara from Los Angeles Times wrote about Viola Davis' performance: "...all eyes are on Davis, Tony winner and Oscar nominee. Magnetic and intimidating, Davis creates an implacable surface beneath which shimmers all manner of fleet and startled emotions. Desire and fear, certainty, self-doubt and resolve are conjured in an instant with the angle of a glance, the lowering of an eyelid and then released as if they were never there." Entertainment Weeklys Melissa Maerz described Davis' performance as "powerfully layered." David Hinckle, from New York Daily News, said that the series does not serve up enough fun unlike Rhimes' other shows, Grey's Anatomy and Scandal. Frazier Moore, Associated Press, wrote that the show "promises to be twisty, wicked, dark and fun. And it stars Viola Davis, who brings life to a character of endless calculations and mystery." 
The second season received critical acclaim. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has an approval rating of 94% based on 87 reviews, with an average rating of 8.2/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Developing a stronger narrative this season, How to Get Away with Murder throws more improbable shocks and higher stakes into the mix, adding preposterous fuel to an addictive fire." Lesley Brock, Paste Magazine, praised the second season writing: "I would not put it past How to Get Away with Murder, which has turned all other ABC show plot lines upside down on their heads and shown that nothing is impossible, to throw incest into an already haphazard mix." Brock gave the season a score of 9 out of 10. Kyle Anderson, Entertainment weekly, wrote that with Davis at the front the show can get away with anything.
The third season also received positive reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a rating of 90% based on 30 reviews, with an average rating of 7.5/10.
The fourth season, once again, also received positive reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a rating of 100% based on 8 reviews, with an average rating of 7.9/10.
The fifth season also received positive reviews. On Rotten Tomatoes, it has a rating of 100% based on 5 reviews, with an average rating of 7.67/10.
CRITICS' TOP TEN LISTS
* No. 9 The Salt Lake Tribune
* No. 1 People Magazine
* No. 9 Us Weekly
* No. 10 Pittsburgh Post-Gazette 
*  – The Globe and Mail
*  – American Film Institute
* No. 10 TV Line
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings.
The series pilot on September 25 set a record for DVR playback viewers with 6 million, surpassing the January 27, 2014, record of 5.6 million set by the pilot of The BlacklistET12014–1522015–1632016–1742017–1852018–19
ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades.
The first season of the show was awarded Television Program of the Year by the American Film Institute and won Outstanding Drama Series at the 46th NAACP Image Awards and 26th GLAAD Media Awards. The show was also nominated for Favorite New TV Drama at the 41st People's Choice Awards and TV Drama of the Year at the GALECA awards. In 2016 the second season was nominated for Outstanding Drama Series at the 47th NAACP Image Awards, Favorite Network TV Drama at the 42nd People's Choice Awards and Outstanding Drama Series at the 27th GLAAD Media Awards.
Viola Davis became the first black woman to win a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, also winning two Screen Actors Guild Awards for Outstanding Performance in a Drama Series and the NAACP Image Awards for Outstanding Actress in a Drama Series. Davis also received nominations from the Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress in a Television Series, the Critics' Choice Awards for Best Actress in a Drama Series, and the Television Critics Association at the TCA Awards for Individual Achievement in Drama. Other cast members have also received recognition for their performances, with Alfred Enoch and Aja Naomi King being nominated by the NAACP as Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series at the NAACP Image Awards. Cicely Tyson was nominated for Outstanding Guest Actress at the 2015 Primetime Emmy Awards.
! Year
! Association
! Category
! Nominee(s)
! Result
! class="unsortable"  Ref.
Television Program of the Year
How to Get Away with Murder
TV Drama of the Year
How to Get Away with Murder
Outstanding Drama Series
How to Get Away with Murder
Outstanding Drama Series
How to Get Away with Murder
Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series
Alfred Enoch
Favorite Actress In A New TV Series
Viola Davis
Favorite New TV Drama
How to Get Away with Murder
Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series
Cicely Tyson
Outstanding Drama Series
How to Get Away with Murder
Entertainer of the Year
Outstanding Drama Series
How to Get Away with Murder
Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series
Alfred Enoch
Favorite Dramatic TV Actress
Viola Davis
Favorite Network TV Drama
How to Get Away with Murder
Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series
Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series
Viola Davis
BROADCAST
Section::::Broadcast.
How to Get Away with Murder airs on Thursdays at 10:00 p.m., Eastern Time. ABC pushed Grey's Anatomy and Scandal to 8 p.m. and 9 p.m., creating an all-night block of Shonda Rhimes-produced dramas airing on Thursdays, a rarity in American television. It was announced on July 14, 2014 that the series would debut September 25, 2014. In Canada, the series airs with sim-subbing of advertising in same timeslot on CTV, though it airs three hours earlier before the original ABC timeslot in the Atlantic Time Zone on CTV Atlantic in the Maritime Provinces.
The series began airing on TV2 in New Zealand and the Seven Network in Australia on February 10, 2015 In Australia, the show moved to 7flix from the second half of season two onwards and like in the US, airs in a programming block dedicated to Shonda Rhimes-produced dramas including Grey's Anatomy and Scandal.
In Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Hong Kong, Thailand and Indonesia the show airs on Sony Channel (Asia) within 12 hours of its original broadcast. In India, it airs on Star World Premiere.
DVD RELEASES AND ONLINE AVAILABILITY
Section::::DVD releases and online availability.
Seasons 1 and 2 have been released on DVD, and Netflix currently streams all four seasons where available (each season is added a month after its finale under their agreement with ABC Studios). The last five episodes aired on ABC are carried on Hulu the day after their premiere. Additionally, individual episodes may be purchased from most online video retailers, including iTunes.
Season 1
The Season 1 DVD was first released in Region 1 on August 4, 2015.
* 15 Episodes
* English, French and Spanish subtitles
* First Year Law: Behind the Scenes
* 'Bye Felicia' Music Video
* Deleted Scenes
* Bloopers
Season 2
The Season 2 DVD was first released in Region 1 on June 21, 2016.
* 15 Episodes
* English, French and Spanish subtitles
* Deleted Scenes - Unseen moments from Season 2
* Bloopers
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
