
THE GIVER QUARTET
The Giver Quartet is a series of 4 young adult novels by Lois Lowry. The quartet consists of The Giver (1993), Gathering Blue (2000), Messenger (2004), and Son (2012). The first book won the 1994 Newbery Medal and has sold more than 10 million copies. The story takes place in the world of the Giver. Each book has a different protagonist, but is set in the same futuristic era.
PLOT OVERVIEW
THE GIVER
Section::::Plot overview.
Section::::The Giver.
The Giver is a 1993 American children's novel (generally young adult or older) set in a society that is at first presented as a utopian society but gradually appears more and more dystopian. The novel follows a boy, Jonas, through the twelfth and thirteenth years of his life. The society has eliminated pain and strife by converting to "Sameness," a plan that has also eradicated emotional depth from their lives. Jonas is selected to inherit the position of Receiver of Memory, the person who stores all the past memories of the time before Sameness in case the memories that others lack are ever needed to aid decisions. Jonas learns the truth about his Utopian society and struggles with its weight. The Community lacks any color, memory, climate, and terrain; that Sameness emphasizes the utopian qualities of the Community.
The Giver won the 1994 Newbery Medal and has sold more than 10 million copies. In Australia, Canada, and the United States, it is a part of many middle school reading lists, but it is also on many challenging book lists and appeared on the American Library Association's list of most challenged books of the 1990s.
The novel forms a loose quartet with three other books set in the same future era: Gathering Blue (2000), Messenger (2004), and Son (2012).
GATHERING BLUE
Section::::Gathering Blue.
Gathering Blue is a 2000 children's dystopian novella. It is set in the same future time period and treats some of the same themes.
The central character, Kira, who has a deformed leg, is orphaned and must learn to survive in a society that normally leaves the weak or disabled exposed to die in the fields. Kira's father was apparently mauled by the Beasts at the Field. Kira's mother had died recently from an illness.
Since she is an orphan, Kira needs a reason for the Council of Edifice to keep her in the village, rather than send her to the Field, which is certain death at the hands of The Beast. Kira's mother used to do embroidery for the Council and taught Kira some of her talents. Kira's gift for embroidery convinces the Council to keep her around to mend and update a beautiful robe, which shows the history of their society. In the course of the book, she begins to learn the art of dyeing thread different colors from except for blue, which nobody in her community knows how to make. But only Annabella knows, Kira's mentor. She also learns more about the truth of her village and the terrible secrets it holds. She then finds her father, who tells the truth of what happened to him and about the Village he now lives in.
MESSENGER
Section::::Messenger.
Messenger takes place about eight years after the events of The Giver and about six years after the events of Gathering Blue. Set in an isolated community, known simply as Village, it focuses on a boy, Matty, who serves as message-bearer through the ominous and lethal Forest, which surrounds the community. This book also tells of the fate of Jonas and Gabe, from 'The Giver".
SON
Section::::Son.
Son follows Claire, the birth mother of Gabriel from The Giver and her journey to locate her son. Then she finds him.
FILM ADAPTATION
Section::::Film adaptation.
A film adaptation of the first book was produced by The Weinstein Company and Walden Media. It was released on August 15, 2014, and starred Jeff Bridges as The Giver, Brenton Thwaites as Jonas and Meryl Streep as the Chief Elder.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
