
NOW YOU SEE ME 2
Now You See Me 2 is a 2016 American magic caper thriller film directed by Jon M. Chu and written by Ed Solomon. The film stars an ensemble cast that includes Jesse Eisenberg, Woody Harrelson, Mark Ruffalo, Dave Franco, Daniel Radcliffe, Lizzy Caplan, Jay Chou, Sanaa Lathan, Michael Caine and Morgan Freeman. A sequel to the 2013 film Now You See Me and the second installment of the film series, the plot follows the Four Horsemen who resurface and are forcibly recruited by a tech genius to pull off an almost impossible heist.
On July 3, 2013, a sequel to Now You See Me was officially announced to be in development. Filming began in November 2014 and lasted until May 2015. The film was released on June 10, 2016 by Summit Entertainment, received mixed reviews from critics and grossed $334 million worldwide.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
Eighteen months after outwitting the FBI, the remaining members of the Four Horsemen—J. Daniel Atlas (Jesse Eisenberg), Merritt McKinney (Woody Harrelson) and Jack Wilder (Dave Franco)—are in hiding in New York City, awaiting further instructions from The Eye, the secret society of magicians they've been recruited into. Atlas, having grown tired of waiting for a mission, seeks out The Eye himself. His search leads him to an underground tunnel in which he hears a voice that tells him that his wait may be coming to an end. The Horsemen's handler, FBI Special Agent Dylan Rhodes (Mark Ruffalo), ultimately assigns them a new mission, exposing corrupt businessman Owen Case (Ben Lamb), whose new software secretly steals data on its users for Case's benefit. Lula May (Lizzy Caplan) is added to the team to replace former member Henley Reeves (Isla Fisher), who has left the Horsemen after breaking up with Atlas.
The Horsemen hijack the launch party for the new software, but the show is interrupted by a mysterious individual who reveals to the world that Wilder, believed to be dead, is actually alive, and that Rhodes is their mole, forcing him to escape. While escaping, the Horsemen enter their escape tube on a roof and emerge in Macau, where they are captured by mercenaries and Chase McKinney (also played by Woody Harrelson), Merritt's twin brother. The Horsemen are then brought before Chase's employer, technology prodigy Walter Mabry (Daniel Radcliffe), Case's former business partner, who faked his own death after Case stole Walter's company. Mabry conscripts the Horsemen into stealing the data-mining device developed by Case to prevent him from using it. The chip allows the user to decrypt and access any electronic device around the world. The Horsemen agree to steal the device.
They get supplies at a famous magic shop in Macau, run by Li (Jay Chou) and Bu Bu (Tsai Chin), and secretly contact The Eye to arrange to hand over the device after they steal it. Meanwhile, Rhodes is branded a fugitive and forced to spring his rival Thaddeus Bradley (Morgan Freeman), whom Rhodes blames for the death of his father, out of jail for help.
The Horsemen infiltrate the facility and steal the chip, despite being interrogated and searched by security guard Allen Scott-Frank (Henry Lloyd-Hughes). Atlas is then confronted by Mabry, revealing that Atlas had been fooled into thinking that Mabry was The Eye. Rhodes intervenes and pretends to retrieve the device, but is captured by Mabry's henchmen and taken to a nearby yacht. There, he learns Mabry is acting on behalf of his father, Arthur Tressler (Michael Caine), whom Rhodes exposed with the help of the Horsemen in the first film. Tressler places Rhodes in a replica of the same safe that his father died in and leaves him to drown, but Rhodes escapes and is rescued by the Horsemen. They find that the chip they had stolen appears to be a fake.
Rhodes and the Horsemen broadcast that they will be performing live in London at midnight on New Year's Eve. Mabry and Tressler, thinking that they have the computer chip, make haste to London, where the Horsemen are performing a series of tricks on the streets. At the Shard, Mabry, Tressler and Chase discover that Rhodes is still alive and capture the five, taking them on his private plane. Mabry takes the card from them, and Rhodes and the other Horsemen are thrown out of the plane supposedly in flight. However, Tressler finds that the plane has never taken off, and instead is on a barge in the middle of the River Thames, with their criminal activities being broadcast live to the world by the Horsemen in the process. Mabry, Tressler and Chase are arrested and Rhodes, now going by his real surname, "Shrike", entrusts the information they've gathered on the real criminals' activities to the FBI, who allows him a head start to escape.
Rhodes and the Horsemen are then taken to meet the leaders of the Eye in a secret library in Greenwich Observatory. They find that the members of the Eye include Li, Bu Bu, Allen Scott-Frank and Thaddeus Bradley. Bradley reveals that he was actually Lionel Shrike's partner, and he had been masquerading as his rival as part of their planned act: he had exposed Lionel's first act planning to be dumbfounded by his second act, only to abandon the Eye after Lionel's death. Before Bradley leaves, he asks Rhodes to be his successor in the Eye's leadership and requests that the Horsemen enter a curtain. The Horsemen, along with Rhodes, go behind the curtain, and find a door behind it. They enter the room and find a staircase; the camera zooms out to the stairs, forming an Eye.
CAST
* Jesse Eisenberg as J. Daniel Atlas. He is the leader of the Four Horseman.
* Mark Ruffalo as Dylan Rhodes/Shrike Former FBI agent and member of The Four Horsemen and the son of the late illusionist Lionel Shrike.
* Woody Harrelson as Merritt McKinney and Chase McKinney. They specialize in hypnosis.
* Dave Franco as Jack Wilder, a magician specializing in card tricks.
* Daniel Radcliffe as Walter Mabry, Arthur Tressler's illegitimate son, a young technology tycoon.
* Lizzy Caplan as Lula May, a new member of The Four Horsemen, replacing Henley.
* Morgan Freeman as Thaddeus Bradley, a magic debunker, exposing the tricks of other magicians and a member of The Eye and a friend of Lionel Shrike.
* Jay Chou as Li, a Macanese magic shop owner.
* Sanaa Lathan as Agent Natalie Austin.
* Michael Caine as Arthur Tressler, the Four Horsemen's former sponsor, who wants revenge for losing his money and power.
* Henry Lloyd-Hughes as Allen Scott-Frank, head of the Macau Science Center and member of the Eye.
* Ben Lamb as Owen Case, Walter's former business partner.
* David Warshofsky as Agent Cowan.
* Dino Fetscher as Octa Guard
* Tsai Chin as Bu Bu
* Varada Sethu as Tressler's Assistant
* Richard Laing as Lionel Shrike, a magician who drowned while performing an escape trick thirty years ago.
* Zach Gerard as Hannes Pike
* Zoey Callandria Jones as Hannes' attractive woman
* Alberto Calvet Gonzalez as Hannes' scientist
* Isla Fisher as Henley Reeves (cameo)
* Jeffray Chung as Chinese geeza at the bar (cameo)
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production.
On July 3, 2013, after the box office success of the first film, Lionsgate CEO Jon Feltheimer confirmed that there would be a sequel to the film, with production beginning in 2014 for an unspecified release date. In September 2014, it was confirmed that Jon M. Chu would replace Louis Leterrier as director. On October 2, 2014, Michael Caine confirmed in an interview that Daniel Radcliffe would be playing his son in the film and that shooting is expected to begin in December in London. The film was produced by Lionsgate and Summit Entertainment. In October 2014, it was announced that Isla Fisher would be unable to reprise her role as Henley Reeves due to her pregnancy and Lizzy Caplan was cast as new character Lula to replace her as the Fourth Horseman. The sequel was thought to be titled Now You See Me: Now You Don't, with the director pushing for that name, but the studio call announced in November 2014 was that the film had changed its title to Now You See Me: The Second Act. On January 28, 2015, Henry Lloyd-Hughes was confirmed to play the role of a tech whiz kid named Allen Scott-Frank. On December 22, 2014, it was reported that Morgan Freeman was not going to reprise his role as Thaddeus Bradley, but on January 19, 2015, film director Chu posted a selfie with Freeman on his Instagram, verifying that he would return.
FILMING
Section::::Filming.
On November 25, 2014, Mark Ruffalo posted to his Facebook that filming had begun on the sequel, as the film was shooting in London, England. On March 11, 2015, shooting began in China, where filming took place in Macau and the Macau Science Center, and ended on May 12, 2015 in New York City.
SOUNDTRACK
Section::::Soundtrack.
The film's music was written and composed by Brian Tyler. The soundtrack was released on June 10, 2016 by Varèse Sarabande.
TRACK LISTING
RELEASE
Section::::Release.
In November 2014, the film was officially titled Now You See Me 2, and was set to be released on June 10, 2016. In March 2016, the film's international release date was announced as July 4, 2016.
HOME MEDIA
Section::::Home media.
Now You See Me 2 was released on Digital HD on August 19, with a subsequent Blu-ray Combo Pack and DVD released on September 6.
RECEPTION
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Box office.
Now You See Me 2 grossed $65.1 million in the United States and Canada and $269.8 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $334.9 million, against a budget of $90 million.
In the United States and Canada, Now You See Me 2 opened on June 10, 2016, alongside Warcraft and The Conjuring 2, and was projected to gross $23–26 million from 3,232 theaters in its opening weekend. The film grossed $1.8 million from its Thursday night previews, besting the $1.5 million made by its predecessor, and $8.4 million on its first day. It went on to gross $22.3 million in its opening weekend, finishing third at the box office behind The Conjuring 2 ($40.4 million) and Warcraft ($24.1 million).
In China, the film was released on June 24, 2016 and had an opening day of $14.8 million, a record for Lionsgate and up 67.9% from the original's first day. In its opening weekend the film grossed $44.4 million, also a record for Lionsgate. China was the largest territory for the film, with a total gross of $97.1 million.
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response.
Now You See Me 2 received mixed reviews from critics. On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 34% based on 165 reviews, with an average rating of 5/10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Now You See Me 2 packs in even more twists and turns than its predecessor, but in the end, it has even less hiding up its sleeve." On another aggregator, Metacritic, the film has a score of 46 out of 100, based on 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale, the same score earned by its predecessor.
Although critics and fans were disappointed that Isla Fisher was not returning as Henley Reeves, many praised Lizzy Caplan's addition to the cast. Caplan was described as "one of the sequel's biggest improvements" by Entertainment Weekly, while Dave White of TheWrap wrote that she "provides a fresh infusion of smart-ass energy into the boy's club." Australian film magazine Filmink also noted that Caplan "over-shadows her skilled co-stars with her sassy and commanding screen presence." Owen Gleiberman of Variety wrote that "all bearded creepy grins, [Daniel Radcliffe] makes Walter a megalomaniac imp, like the world's youngest Bond villain." Randy Cordova of The Arizona Republic, who preferred the film to the original, said of the villain character that "In [Radcliffe's] hands, he is a spoiled and petulant baddie, alternately creepy and hilarious."
Ignatiy Vishnevetsky of The A.V. Club wrote that the sequel "up[s] the ludicrous quotient" from the original, "double-timing the convoluted plotting and embracing implausibility as an aesthetic...[I]f [director Jon M.] Chu doesn't seem comfortable with the swooping, lens-flare-speckled flashiness that director Louis Leterrier brought to the first film, he seems even less interested than his predecessor in creating the impression of a recognizably real world — which is a good thing, at least for a movie about a superstar heist crew called the Horsemen that involves twins, multiple secret identities, and a global corporate surveillance plot that can only be foiled through the use of stage magic."
Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune gave the film a mixed review but considered it "more fun" than its predecessor.
ACCOLADES
FUTURE
NOW YOU SEE ME 3
Section::::Future.
Section::::Now You See Me 3.
In May 2015, Lionsgate CEO Jon Feltheimer announced that they had indeed "already begun early planning" for Now You See Me 3. It was later confirmed that Lizzy Caplan will be reprising the role of Lula May, and that a new cast member, Benedict Cumberbatch, will be joining the cast. It was also confirmed that Isla Fisher will be returning to the series as Henley Reeves, after her absence from the first sequel.
SPIN-OFF FILM
Section::::Spin-off film.
In July 2016, The Hollywood Reporter reported that Lionsgate plans on making a Now You See Me spin-off with a primarily Chinese cast, starring Jay Chou as Li, his character from Now You See Me 2.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
