
KABANERI OF THE IRON FORTRESS
A mobile game developed by TriFort, Inc. and published by DMM Games titled is scheduled for release on December 19, 2018 on Android and iOS, featuring an animated opening sequence by Wit Studio. An anime theatrical film that is set six months after the anime series, titled , is scheduled to premiere in Q2 2019.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
A mysterious virus appears during the industrial revolution that transforms infected humans into and rapidly spreads. Kabane are aggressive, undead creatures that cannot be defeated unless the glowing heart, which is protected by a layer of lead, is pierced, or an important body part is completely severed (such as the head). Unfortunately, most melee weapons and the steam-pressure guns used by the are not very effective against them.
On the island country , people have built fortress-like "stations" to shelter themselves from these creatures. People access the stations and transport wares between them with the help of . One day, a hayajirō hijacked by the Kabane crashes into Aragane Station and they overrun the city. A young engineer called Ikoma uses the opportunity to test with success his anti-Kabane weapon, the , but is infected in the process, although he manages to resist the virus and become a , a human-Kabane hybrid. Assisted by , another Kabaneri who appears to help them, Ikoma and the other survivors of the station board a hayajirō named and depart to seek shelter elsewhere, fighting the hordes of Kabane along the way.
CHARACTERS
ANIME
MUSIC
Section::::Music.
The soundtrack was composed by Hiroyuki Sawano and was released by Aniplex on May 18, 2016. The opening theme is "Kabaneri of the Iron Fortress" by Egoist and the ending theme is "ninelie" by Aimer with chelly. For episode 11, the ending theme is "Through My Blood " by Aimer.
TRACK LISTING
Section::::Track listing.
All music composed by Hiroyuki Sawano.
NOTES
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
The series won the 2016 Newtype Anime Awards for Best TV Anime, Best Soundtrack, Best Character Design, Best Screenplay and Best Studio.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
