
BABY DRIVER
Baby Driver is a 2017 action film written and directed by Edgar Wright. It stars Ansel Elgort as a young getaway driver, who finds catharsis in music, seeking freedom from a life of organized crime with his lover Debora (Lily James). Kevin Spacey, Jon Hamm, Eiza González, Jamie Foxx, and Jon Bernthal appear in supporting roles. Eric Fellner and his Working Title Films partner Tim Bevan produced Baby Driver alongside Big Talk Productions' Nira Park. Sony and TriStar Pictures co-financed and distributed the film.
Baby Driver is a longtime passion project Wright had developed for over two decades. He devised the film's blueprint well into his youth, but the experience helming his other projects shaped his ambitions for Baby Driver. Originally centered in Los Angeles, the film's setting was later revised to Atlanta in the script, and preserving its ethos became an important aspect of the storytelling. Principal photography took place in the city over four months, from February to May 2016. Production involved the planning of meticulously coordinated stunts, choreography, and shooting as much of the film in-camera as possible. Baby Driver premiered at South by Southwest on March 11, 2017, and in theaters in North America and the United Kingdom on June 28, 2017.
Baby Driver was praised for its screenplay, direction, acting, action sequences, and soundtrack. It was chosen by the National Board of Review as one of the top ten films of 2017. It grossed $226 million worldwide on a production budget of $34 million. The film received several awards and nominations, including three nominations at the 90th Academy Awards (for Best Film Editing, Best Sound Editing and Best Sound Mixing), two nominations at the 23rd Critics' Choice Awards (winning one) and the 71st British Academy Film Awards (winning one), as well a Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy nomination for Elgort at the 75th Golden Globe Awards.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
Baby Driver opens with a six-minute sequence of a heist crew—Griff (Jon Bernthal), Darling (Eiza Gonzalez), Buddy (Jon Hamm), and the aloof Baby (Ansel Elgort)—embarking on the heist of the First Bank of Atlanta. Baby works for the criminal mastermind Doc (Kevin Spacey) as an on-call getaway driver for his rotating heist crew as recompense for a stolen car. He is the sole survivor of a fatal car crash from childhood that leaves him orphaned and handicapped with tinnitus, and therefore, finds catharsis in music. In leisure, Baby produces mixtapes sampled with recorded conversations and cares for his deaf foster father, Joseph (CJ Jones).
Baby meets a young waitress named Debora (Lily James) at a restaurant called Bo's Diner, the workplace of his deceased mother. The two immediately bond over their musical interests, so much that they vow to leave the city together. At the debriefing for the follow-up assignment, Eddie (Flea), JD (Lanny Joon), and the blood thirsty Bats (Jamie Foxx) are summoned with Baby to infiltrate a small bank. The robbery descends into chaos after an armed bystander thwarts the attack, but Baby and the crew escape unharmed. He briefly leaves Doc's operation after making restitution, only to be coerced back when Doc threatens to harm Debora and Joseph.
For the final heist, Baby is reunited with Buddy, Darling, and Bats. Their rendezvous with firearms dealers to purchase stolen weaponry turns deadly as the group emerge on the defensive against an apparent ambush setup by the Atlanta Police Department (APD). They kill all of the dealers while Darling is grazed during the intense shootout. Afterwards, Bats forces Baby to stop at Bo's Diner, oblivious to his romance with Debora. Bats nearly shoots her to refrain from paying for drinks, but Baby stops him just in time. A visibly angry Doc nixes the heist plans after learning that the dealers were dirty cops on his payroll. However, at the insistence of Bats, Buddy, Darling, and ultimately Baby, their plan continues. Hostility flares when Buddy and Bats confront Baby over his tape recordings moments before he can depart Atlanta with Debora, though when they play the mixtapes for Doc, the crew are reassured of Baby's loyalty.
The group's animosities climax on the day of their heist. After a scuffle, Baby impales Bats by slamming into a bundle of rebar, sabotaging their car and the heist at large. The remaining three flee on foot. Darling is killed in gunfire with the APD, and Baby flees the premise with the vengeful Buddy in pursuit. Baby picks up Joseph at his apartment en route to an assisted living facility. He then rushes to the diner for Debora, where Buddy, armed with a pistol, awaits his arrival. Baby shoots Buddy and exits Bo's with Debora, leaving Buddy at the mercy of swarming police reinforcements. As the pair secure a stolen vehicle in another part of town, a wounded Buddy kills an APD officer back at the diner.
At the safe house, Doc refuses Baby's pleas for help, but relents when he sees Debora consoling him. He lends the couple cash and an escape route out of the country. Inside the parking garage, they are confronted by a trio of officers thought to have been slain by Bats at their prior rendezvous. Doc manages to fend them off in time for Baby and Debora to flee. Suddenly, Buddy ambushes them with a stolen police car, killing Doc. A cat-and-mouse pursuit ensues until Buddy has Baby at his mercy. He fires his gun next to both of Baby's ears, deafening him, but the distraction allows Debora to subdue Buddy with a crowbar. After being shot in the leg by Baby, Buddy falls to his death.
Baby surrenders once he and Debora encounter a police roadblock. At the trial, Joseph, Debora and other mutuals testify in his defense. The judge gives Baby a 25-year prison sentence with the possibility of parole after serving five, though Debora stays in contact with Baby during his incarceration. By the time Baby is paroled from prison, he finds Debora waiting for him, and the two are happily reunited.
CAST
* Ansel Elgort as Baby:
* Kevin Spacey as Doc:
* Lily James as Debora:
* Jon Hamm as Buddy:
* Jamie Foxx as Bats:
* Eiza Gonzalez as Monica 'Darling':
* Jon Bernthal as Griff:
* CJ Jones as Joseph:
Section::::Cast.
Other cast members include Flea as Eddie; Lanny Joon as JD; R. Marcos Taylor as gun runner Armie; Sky Ferreira as Baby's biological mother; Lance Palmer as Baby's biological father; Big Boi and Killer Mike as restaurant patrons; Paul Williams as a butcher; and Jon Spencer as a prison guard.
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production.
Section::::Development.
Baby Driver is a longtime passion project Edgar Wright had been developing since 1995, when the writer-director was a struggling 21 year-old filmmaker living in an apartment in suburban London. At the time, he relocated to London to finish his first professional film, the low-budget western comedy A Fistful of Fingers, and to contemplate his future in entertainment. Wright's listening sessions to Orange (1994), the then-recently released fourth studio album by the Jon Spencer Blues Explosion, enabled him to conceptualize a blueprint for Baby Driver. He at first envisioned a high-speed car chase, which then evolved into a full sequence where the getaway driver dances to "Bellbottoms" in his car before the ensuing chase. Though this was ultimately written into the script as the film's opening sequence, Wright's vision was still in its infancy and far from a fully realized project.
On a £25,000 budget, Wright developed the music video for Mint Royale's "Blue Song" in 2003, featuring a backstory gleaned from Baby Driver. The video became an unexpected sensation, and although happy with his work, Wright was frustrated for cannibalizing an idea he felt had enormous potential. The writer-director admits that in retrospect, his music video was a significant undertaking because it provided proof of concept for Baby Driver. The release of Shaun of the Dead the following year was another important catalyst for not only its artistic direction, but for signaling the start of a long-term working relationship between Wright and the producers at Working Title, who would assist the development of Baby Driver. By 2007, after signing a multi-picture deal with Working Title, and with a clearer vision of the project, the writer-director met with Steven Price to discuss early musical ideas for Baby Driver. The drafting of a story started around the release of Scott Pilgrim vs. the World (2010), but pre-production of the film stalled as Wright's other projects—The World's End (2013) and the then-forthcoming Ant-Man (2015), for which he already prepared a script with Joe Cornish—took precedence. Work resumed immediately after Wright's departure from Ant-Man, when the studio began assembling their roster of actors and technical staff in preparation for filming.
Wright, lead film editor Paul Machliss, and Los Angeles-based editor Evan Shiff devised a pre-edit of Baby Driver with animatics in the initial stages of production. With Avid Media Composer, Machliss was tasked with syncopating each animatic to the corresponding soundtrack. He and Wright had an existing professional relationship from Scott Pilgrim vs. the World and The World's End. In addition, Machliss worked on set providing input for the shoot, an unusual move given film editors are typically absent from the set of most films during production.
FILMING
Section::::Filming.
Originally, Los Angeles was written in the script as Baby Driver setting, but the costly production expense meant shooting in the city was not practical. The studio instead toured cities that offered generous transferable tax credits for film production, including Atlanta, which emerged as the frontrunner during preliminary scouting. Preserving the city's ethos was imperative for an authentic story, as Atlanta typically doubles for other global cities in blockbuster cinema. Wright spent about a week in the city observing the local scenery and culture to supplement the necessary revisions to the script, and found that the story of Baby Driver was better realized in Atlanta because of the city's renown as a logistics hub. Principal photography, which lasted four months from February to May 2016, took place mostly in the central business district. Location shots emphasize many of Atlanta's landmarks, cultural institutions, even local media. Elsewhere, filming occurred in Gainesville and rural Monroe County. Although other outer suburban areas of the metro were scouted for main unit filming, Wright preferred the urban form of Atlanta proper to the suburbs' dense foliage, which he considered an unsuitable backdrop for the film. Baby Driver contributed $30.1 million to the local economy.
Wright cited Vanishing Point (1971), The Driver (1978), Point Break (1991), Reservoir Dogs (1993), Heat (1995), among others as significant influences on the film's visual hallmarks and creative direction. To evoke their aesthetic, one of the production's main goals was to produce Baby Driver using traditional filmmaking techniques. This meant planning meticulously coordinated stunts, choreography, and shooting as much of the film in-camera as possible, relying on visual effects only when necessary. Baby Driver was director of photography Bill Pope's third film with Wright, having previously collaborated for Scott Pilgrim vs. the World and The World's End. Pope shot the project in anamorphic format on 35mm film using Kodak film stock. Baby Driver was shot on Panavision Panaflex Millennium XL2 cameras and G-Series, T-Series, and C-Series anamorphic lenses. Panavision's Atlanta offices assisted the needs of the production when managing the logistics became challenging. One action scene in particular, staged in a parking garage on the Atlanta Falcons' training facility, was only available for film production at night, and thus difficult to shoot because of the dull lighting. They ended up filming the scene in digital format with the company's refurbished Arri Alexa cameras, which had greater exposure latitude.
STUNTS AND CHOREOGRAPHY
Section::::Stunts and choreography.
Second-unit director Darrin Prescott coordinated the vehicular stunts on Baby Driver with Jeremy Fry, the project's stunt driver, and a team of other professionals. They rehearsed at the Atlanta Motor Speedway before receiving clearance to shoot in the city, and the production filmed the stunts with specialized pursuit cranes, small cars with an installed camera crane. Machliss would then edit the footage into updated animatics, thus fleshing out the precision of the stunts in time for shooting. Fry performed many of the vehicular stunts; the actors were allowed to perform less demanding stunts with the proper training. 
Prescott saw Baby Driver as his biggest undertaking because of the complicated stunt work involved. One such scene features a "180 in and 180 out" maneuver, in which Fry makes 180-degree turns forward and backward in a narrow alley with several other vehicles in the way. This was shot in five or six takes. "There's a lot going through your head. You don't want Jeremy to get hurt. Also, there's a lot of money being spent to get this on camera. The cameras needed to be out of the way so nobody would get hurt", Prescott recalled. Another example is the freeway car chase scene midway in Baby Driver opening sequence. The production only had an eight-hour window to shoot because they did not have the clearance to shut down I-85. So with such a small window, the filmmakers rehearsed for only an hour before they began filming. This scene involved a number of high-speed jumps, barrier jumps, among other stunts that Prescott and his team carefully coordinated bearing traffic flow in mind, and 50 production vehicles encircled by a sprawling police motorcade, occupying all lanes of I-85. The choice of the getaway cars corresponded to specifications in the screenplay that they be nondescript and blend with the surrounding traffic. Though Wright sought a Toyota Corolla based on data about frequently stolen cars, the production instead used a red Subaru WRX after the studio requested a vehicle that "could be a little sexier".
Ryan Heffington supervised the choreography. He was responsible for synchronizing the movement of the actors and stunt performers in the film's choreographic sequences. Known in the music industry for his work with Sia, Arcade Fire, and other artists, Baby Driver is Heffington's first foray into film. Compelled by the script, the choreographer hadn't been familiar with Wright's prior work, researching after his initial interview for the job. The two mapped out the artistic vision in early conversations, using songs with dramatic tempo changes or structure as templates. By the first day of shooting, Heffington was already supervising one of the film's more elaborate sequences—the single three-minute tracking shot of Baby's coffee run through town, employing 50–60 extras for the set. Choreographing others sets was sometimes less taxing because some of the actors had prior dance experience. The production would also play the music as the cast rehearsed each sequence, shot by shot.
SOUND DESIGN
Section::::Sound design.
When sound editing supervisor Julian Slater was first approached for Baby Driver, he was sent a copy of the script and a PDF file containing the curated selection of music, along with a rough audio mix. Working closely with music editor Bradley Farmer, the pair dissected each musical cue into a unique tempo map, thereby allowing for synchronization at any given time. This process required frequent pitch scaling of the sounds so they wouldn't be off-pitch. One of the initial responsibilities was to create a sound for Baby's tinnitus. Slater and Farmer experimented with an array of sounds, some subtle, others quite intense. Accordingly, they would adjust the frequency of an audio mix to correspond with their music cue. The intensity of Baby's tinnitus in the audio mix depended on his mood; for example, the more anxious he is, the louder the ringing. Managing tempo changes with the sound effects proved troublesome. Slater said, "Bradley showed me to work musically [...] How a gunshot works with a kick drum, but not too obviously. For every layer that happens musically, have another layer that happens non-musically so that you perceive it only some of the time." Perhaps the audio team's most complex challenge was the coffee run scene. Completed in 25 takes, it features an assortment of subtle sound effects from engines, dialogue with changing nuance, and so forth. Another challenge was in one of the final scenes of Baby Driver, where Baby is deafened by a gunshot to his ears. It required a new set of frequencies, altered voices, and other sounds to emphasize Baby's distorted point of view.
The audio department spent eight days recording the car sound effects at the Atlanta Motor Speedway. For onboard recordings (the sounds heard from the perspective of the driver and passengers), sound effect recordist Watson Wu installed about six microphones per vehicle; one in the airbox, another on the radio dashboard, two near the exhausts, and two in the engine compartment. Boom operator James Peterson followed each car with a shotgun mic for the external recordings, while using XY stereo equipment to capture the noise of passing vehicles. The crew premixed their audio at the Twickenham Studios in London, while the final mixing took place at Goldcrest Films' Soho post-production facility.
MUSIC
Section::::Music.
Wright and Price exchanged ideas throughout pre-production, selecting ten tracks to shape the project's musical direction. In total, the filmmakers licensed 36 tracks with Right Music, many of which had been written in the script well before filming. For certain hip hop and electronic songs written in the script, Wright was unable to acquire the usage rights because they contained uncleared samples. At that point, he pursued licensing of the sampled songs in question and used them in the soundtrack instead. Danger Mouse and Kid Koala composed the album's only original tracks, "Chase Me" and "Was He Slow?". "Chase Me" features contributions from Run the Jewels and Big Boi. For "Was He Slow?", which samples some of Spacey's dialogue, Kid Koala produced the song using analog equipment. Columbia imprint 30th Century Records released Baby Driver soundtrack album on June 23, 2017, through vinyl and CD. A follow-up album containing previously unreleased content was issued on April 13, 2018.
ANALYSIS
Section::::Analysis.
Baby Driver is a story of redemption, and as such, delves into the protagonist's moral shift from an impassive antihero to a reluctant hero. The character of Baby strongly resembles the antiheroes of the film's artistic antecedents. His questionable moral outlook manifests through his reliance on music, which he uses to escape the chaos in his environment, in addition to his own tinnitus. It is only through his obligation to protect Debora, Joseph, and the impending threat of his heist crew on his livelihood, that Baby is forced to confront reality, no longer able to ignore the mayhem around him. Baby Driver employs some of the conventions of gangster film, chiefly heroic fatalism and uncompromising villainy.
Characteristic of Wright's films, Baby Driver is driven by strong color cues. Colors are used symbolically to represent the personas of the core characters. Baby is dressed in drab colors that reflect his black-and-white perspective of the universe. This muted palette clashes with the bright, vibrant colors that symbolize his peers: red is used to represent Bats, purple and pink for Darling, and blue for Buddy. As the film progresses, the pressures of organized crime becomes overwhelming, and Baby's wardrobe evolves by proxy. He is seen in faint greys and bloodstained white shirts at that point. Costume designer Courtney Hoffman incorporated light grey colors into Baby's wardrobe to illustrate his struggle of seeking freedom from the criminal world.
RELEASE
Section::::Release.
The global premiere of Baby Driver took place on March 11, 2017, at the South by Southwest festival in Austin. The film was released in theaters in North America and the United Kingdom on June 28, 2017, six weeks earlier than the initial schedule. TriStar expedited Baby Driver release due to the enthusiastic response in the film festival circuit.
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Box office.
Baby Driver was considered a financial success overall. Although the film's performance faltered in China, it performed strongly in North American and European territories until the end of its theatrical run. Baby Driver earned $107.8 million (47.5%) in North America and $119.1 million (52.5%) elsewhere for a worldwide total of $226.9 million, making it the 42nd highest-grossing film of 2017, and Wright's highest-grossing film to date. The TriStar–Media Rights Capital partnership recouped their budget with a $51.5 million net profit, factoring marketing costs and other expenses.
In the United States, exit polling showed strong commercial potential across a variety of audiences. CinemaScore polls conducted during opening night revealed the average grade moviegoers gave Baby Driver was A− on an A+ to F scale. Audiences were mostly younger; 52% were under 25 and 57% were men. The main reasons given for seeing the film were its action (44%), the actors (26%), and Wright (16%). Predictions, while acknowledging the positive reaction to Baby Driver, were conflicted about the long-term commercial viability of an economical film in a fiercely competitive market. The film made $5.7M in its first day of wide release—including $2.1M from Tuesday-night previews—and scooped another $3.3M the following Thursday. It went on to take second place at the weekend box office with $30M from 3,226 theaters, trailing behind Despicable Me 3. This return surpassed Sony's expectations for the weekend, and marked the best opening of any Wright-directed film in the United States to date. Baby Driver grossed $13M (declining 36.7%) in its second weekend at the box office, and another $8.8M the following weekend. By August 25, TriStar re-expanded the film's theater presence, earning $1.2M from 1,074 theaters (34% increase from the previous week).
HOME MEDIA
Section::::Home media.
Baby Driver was released on Digital Media on September 12, 2017, and on 4K Ultra HD/Blu-ray Combo Pack, Blu-ray & DVD October 10, 2017, from Sony Pictures Home Entertainment. The film debuted at No. 2 on both the NPD VideoScan First Alert sales chart and the dedicated Blu-ray Disc sales chart, behind .
RECEPTION
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Critical response.
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 93% based on 325 reviews, with an average rating of 8/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Stylish, exciting, and fueled by a killer soundtrack, Baby Driver hits the road and it's gone—proving fast-paced action movies can be smartly written without sacrificing thrills." On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 86 out of 100, based on 53 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A–" on an A+ to F scale.
Peter Debruge of Variety called the film "a blast, featuring wall-to-wall music and a surfeit of inspired ideas". The New York Times Manohla Dargis listed the film as a "NYT Critic's Pick", writing that the film "is so good that you want it to be better and go deeper, for it to put down its guns (or at least hold them differently) and transcend its clichés and cine-quotes so it can rocket out of the genre safe box into the cosmic beyond where craft and technique transform into art". Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian gave the film five out of five, listing it as his "film of the week" and calling it an "outrageously enjoyable petrolhead heist caper".
CNN's Brian Lowry wrote that the film "is a crackling-good ride, one that organically weaves music and humor into a slick showcase for its cast. Despite a few plotholes toward the end, writer-director Edgar Wright's stylish thriller consistently clicks on all cylinders". Brian Tallerico of RogerEbert.com gave the film three-and-a-half out of four, and called it "fluid and jaw-dropping—the kind of thing you want to see immediately again after it's over to catch all the things you missed". Empires Terri White gave the film five out of five, calling it an "awe-inspiring piece of filmmaking" and "one of the most utterly original films in years".
However, there were several less positive reviews. Rating Baby Driver three out of five, Joyce Slaton of Common Sense Media praised the driving sequences and music, but felt that the film "quickly slump[s] into stereotypes" and "fails to grab viewers on a visceral level", particularly criticizing Baby's backstory and the portrayal of Debora and Darling. In a dismissive review, Richard Brody of The New Yorker cited many flaws, calling it "an imitation of generation's worth of imitations."
ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades.
! scope="col" Award
! scope="col" Date of ceremony
! scope="col" Category
! scope="col" Recipient(s) and nominee(s)
! scope="col" Result
! scope="col" class="unsortable" 
! scope="row" rowspan="3" Academy Awards
! scope="row"  Alliance of Women Film Journalists
! scope="row"  American Cinema Editors
! scope="row" rowspan="2" British Academy Film Awards
! scope="row"  Casting Society of America
! scope="row"  Chicago Film Critics Association
! scope="row"  Cinema Audio Society Awards
! scope="row" rowspan="2" Critics' Choice Movie Awards
! scope="row"  Detroit Film Critics Society
! scope="row" rowspan="5" Empire Awards
! scope="row" rowspan="3" Georgia Film Critics Association
! scope="row"  Golden Globe Awards
! scope="row" rowspan="3" Golden Reel Awards
! scope="row" rowspan="2" Golden Tomato Awards
! scope="row"  IndieWire Critic's Poll
Baby Driver
! scope="row" rowspan="2" Location Managers Guild Awards
! scope="row"  London Film Critics' Circle
! scope="row"  Make-Up Artists and Hair Stylists Guild
! scope="row"  National Board of Review
! scope="row"  New York Film Critics Online
! scope="row"  NME Awards
! scope="row"  Online Film Critics Society
! scope="row" rowspan="2" San Diego Film Critics Society
! scope="row"  San Francisco Film Critics Circle Awards
! scope="row"  Satellite Awards
! scope="row"  Saturn Awards
! scope="row"  Screen Actors Guild Awards
! scope="row"  Seattle Film Critics Society
! scope="row" rowspan="3" St. Louis Film Critics Association
! scope="row"  Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel.
On December 5, 2017, Wright confirmed that Sony Pictures would like to produce a sequel to Baby Driver, and that he planned to write the screenplay for it.
SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 2017
* List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
