
MS HARMONY OF THE SEAS
MS Harmony of the Seas is an built by STX France at the Chantiers de l'Atlantique shipyard in Saint-Nazaire, France for Royal Caribbean International. With a gross tonnage of 226,963 GT, she is the second largest passenger ship in the world, surpassing her older sisters and , but surpassed by her newer sister .
HISTORY
Section::::History.
The success of the first two Oasis-class ships led Royal Caribbean Cruises to order a third ship of the type in December 2012. Harmony of the Seas was floated out on 19 June 2015, began her first sea trials on 10 March 2016, and was delivered to Royal Caribbean on 12 May 2016. After a construction time of 32 months, the ship first set sail on 15 May 2016 from the STX France docks in Saint-Nazaire, viewed by some 70,000 people. Her first destination was Southampton, England, although her home port was Barcelona until 23 October 2016 when she crossed the Atlantic.
Harmony of the Seas took two short "preview cruises", three nights to Cherbourg and four nights to Rotterdam, after reaching port in Southampton on 17 May. During these voyages, passengers complained of ongoing construction, a lack of hot water, unopened attractions, excessive waits at restaurants, and other issues. The ship's maiden voyage departed from Southampton on 29 May and arrived at its summer home port of Barcelona on 5 June. According to passengers on this cruise, construction had finished and the ship was ready to sail.For the inaugural season, Harmony of the Seas offered seven-night western Mediterranean cruises originating from Barcelona and Civitavecchia.
On 10 November 2016, the vessel was officially christened by her godmother, Miami-Dade County teacher Brittany Affolter.
FACILITIES
Section::::Facilities.
Harmony of the Seas has 2,747 staterooms, of various sizes, to accommodate (at double occupancy) 5,479 guests. Harmony of the Seas has a number of water based attractions including a large dry slide complex, two surf simulators and 23 swimming pools.
. She also has 20 dining venues, a 1400 seat theatre and 11,252 works of art.
TECHNOLOGY
Section::::Technology.
Harmony of the Seas is 20% more energy efficient than her sister ships Oasis of the Seas and Allure of the Seas. Small air bubbles from the keel reduce drag and thus fuel consumption by 7-8%, and a smooth hull surface further reduces resistance. The bubble system also reduces propeller noise, and is used on Celebrity Reflection and . LED and fluorescent lamps replace incandescent light bulbs, reducing power consumption and need for air conditioning. The engine system uses a waste heat recovery system, and drives three Azipod propellers.
INCIDENTS
Section::::Incidents.
On 13 September 2016, one employee was killed and four were injured when a life boat broke loose and dropped from the fifth deck during a security drill.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
