
BIG LITTLE LIES (TV SERIES)
Big Little Lies is an American drama television series, based on the novel of the same name by Liane Moriarty, that premiered on February 19, 2017, on HBO. Created and written by David E. Kelley, the series' seven-episode first season was directed by Jean-Marc Vallée.
Big Little Lies stars Nicole Kidman, Reese Witherspoon and Shailene Woodley and tells the story of three emotionally troubled women in Monterey, California, who become embroiled in a murder investigation. Alexander Skarsgård, Laura Dern, Jeffrey Nordling, Adam Scott, Zoë Kravitz, and James Tupper feature in supporting roles. Critically acclaimed, the series garnered several accolades. It received 16 Emmy Award nominations and won eight, including Outstanding Limited Series and acting awards for Kidman, Skarsgård, and Dern. The trio also won Golden Globe Awards in addition to a Golden Globe Award for Best Miniseries or Television Film win for the series. Kidman and Skarsgård also received Screen Actors Guild Awards for their performances.
Despite originally being billed as a miniseries, HBO renewed the series for a second season. Production on the second season began in March 2018 and is set to premiere in 2019. All seven episodes are being written by Kelley and directed by Andrea Arnold.
CAST AND CHARACTERS
MAIN
* Reese Witherspoon as Madeline Martha Mackenzie
* Nicole Kidman as Celeste Wright
* Shailene Woodley as Jane Chapman
* Alexander Skarsgård as Perry Wright, Celeste's husband
* Adam Scott as Ed Mackenzie, Madeline's husband
* Zoë Kravitz as Bonnie Carlson, Nathan's second wife
* James Tupper as Nathan Carlson, Madeline's ex-husband
* Jeffrey Nordling as Gordon Klein, Renata's husband
* Laura Dern as Renata Klein
* Kathryn Newton as Abigail Carlson (season 2, recurring season 1), Madeline's elder daughter
* Sarah Sokolovic as Tori Bachman (season 2, recurring season 1)
* Meryl Streep as Mary Louise Wright (season 2), Perry's mother
* Crystal Fox as Elizabeth Howard (season 2)
RECURRING
* Iain Armitage as Ziggy Chapman, Jane's son
* Sarah Baker as Thea Cunningham
* Sarah Burns as Gabrielle
* P. J. Byrne as Principal Nippal
* Santiago Cabrera as Joseph Bachman
* Darby Camp as Chloe Mackenzie, Madeline's younger daughter
* Hong Chau as Jackie
* Kelen Coleman as Harper Stimson
* Cameron Crovetti as Josh Wright, Celeste's son
* Nicholas Crovetti as Max Wright, Celeste's son
* Merrin Dungey as Detective Adrienne Quinlan
* Ivy George as Amabella Klein, Renata's daughter
* Virginia Kull as Ms. Barnes, the children's elementary teacher
* Chloe Coleman as Skye Carlson, Bonnie's daughter
* Molly Hagan as Dr. Moriarty, Ziggy's child psychologist
* Larry Sullivan as Oren
* David Monahan as Bernard
* Kathreen Khavari as Samantha
* Joseph Cross as Tom, Madeline and Celeste's favorite cafe owner
* Robin Weigert as Dr. Amanda Reisman, Perry and Celeste's therapist
* Larry Bates as Stu
* Douglas Smith as Corey Brockfield (season 2)
* Mo McRae as Michael Perkins (season 2)
* Martin Donovan as Martin Howard (season 2)
* Poorna Jagannathan as Katie Richmond (season 2)
* Denis O'Hare as Ira Farber (season 2)
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production.
Section::::Development.
On August 6, 2014, it was announced Nicole Kidman and Reese Witherspoon had optioned the screen rights to Liane Moriarty's novel Big Little Lies. The actresses were expected to develop the project as a film in which they would both star. Bruna Papandrea and Per Saari were set to executive produce alongside Kidman and Witherspoon. Moriarty was also expected to produce as well. On November 25, 2014, it was announced that Kidman and Witherspoon had decided to develop the project into a limited television series instead of the originally planned film. Additionally, it was announced that television series would be written by David E. Kelley. On May 8, 2015, it was announced that HBO had given the production a series order and that in addition to writing, Kelley would also executive produce. On October 23, 2015, it was reported that Jean-Marc Vallée was in talks to direct the first episode of the series with the potential to direct more. On December 17, 2015, it was announced that Vallée would direct all seven episodes of the series. On November 28, 2016, it was announced that the series would premiere on February 19, 2017.
CASTING
SEASON 1
Section::::Casting.
Section::::Season 1.
Alongside the initial announcement of the production's development, it was reported that Kidman and Witherspoon would also star in the adaptation as well. In December 2015, it announced that Shailene Woodley, Adam Scott, Laura Dern, and Zoë Kravitz had joined the cast in lead roles. On January 5, 2016, it was announced that Alexander Skarsgard and James Tupper had joined the main cast and that Jeffrey Nordling, Santiago Cabrera, P. J. Byrne, Kelen Coleman, Sarah Burns, Darby Camp, Cameron and Nicholas Crovetti, Ivy George, Chloe Coleman, Virginia Kull, Sarah Baker, Kathreen Khavari, Larry Bates, Hong Chau, and Gia Carides had joined the show's supporting cast. A few days later, it was reported that Iain Armitage had joined the cast in the role of Woodley's character's son. Soon after that, it was reported that Merrin Dungey, Larry Sullivan, and David Monahan had also joined the cast.
SEASON 2
Section::::Season 2.
On January 24, 2018, it was announced that Meryl Streep had joined the main cast in the role of Mary Louise Wright, the mother of Perry (played by Alexander Skarsgard in Season 1). In February 2018, it was confirmed that Shailene Woodley, Laura Dern, Zoë Kravitz, Adam Scott, James Tupper, Jeffrey Nordling and Iain Armitage were returning for the second season. On March 27, 2018, it was announced that Douglas Smith had joined the cast in a recurring role. On April 3, 2018, it was confirmed that Kathryn Newton, Robin Weigert, Merrin Dungey, and Sarah Sokolovic were returning for the second season. Newton and Sokolovic have been upped from recurring roles to series regulars. Additionally, it was announced that Crystal Fox had joined the cast in a main role and that Mo McRae would appear in a recurring capacity. On April 10, 2018, it was announced that Martin Donovan had been cast in a recurring role. In May 2018, it was reported that Poorna Jagannathan had joined the cast in a recurring capacity. Additionally, it was confirmed that P.J. Byrne would reprise his role of Principal Nippal. On June 15, 2018, it was announced that Denis O'Hare had been cast in a recurring role.
FILMING
Section::::Filming.
The series was shot with an Arri Alexa digital camera. Jean-Marc Vallée, who directed the entirety of the first season, preferred using natural lighting and handheld shooting style to allow actors to move freely around the set.
Much of the series was filmed on location on the Monterey Peninsula and Big Sur. Several scenes were shot in Pacific Grove and Carmel Highlands as well.
RELEASE
MARKETING
Section::::Release.
Section::::Marketing.
On October 16, 2016, HBO released the first teaser trailer for the series. On December 5, 2016, HBO released a full length trailer for the series.
PREMIERE
Section::::Premiere.
On February 7, 2017, the series held its official premiere at the TCL Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles, California.
DISTRIBUTION
Section::::Distribution.
Internationally, the series premiered on February 20, 2017, in Australia on Showcase, and on March 13, 2017, in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky Atlantic.
RENEWAL
Section::::Renewal.
The show was initially conceived of and billed as a miniseries of seven episodes. In the wake of the Emmy nominations, Reese Witherspoon said: "As of right now, I think it's pretty whole. I feel really good about where it is, and if this is all it ever was, it's a beautiful thing we all accomplished together", while Vallée came out strongly against the idea of producing a second season: "There's no reason to make a season two. That was meant to be a one-time deal, and it's finishing in a way where it's for the audience to imagine what can happen. If we do a season two, we'll break that beautiful thing and spoil it". Later, when the show garnered an array of critical accolades, he changed his mind: "It'd be great to reunite the team and to do it. Are we going to be able to do it, altogether? I wish."
In July 2017, two weeks after the series was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Limited Series, HBO revealed that a second season was possible, and that Moriarty had been asked to write a story for it. In December 2017, after the Critics' Choice Television Award and Golden Globe Award nomination voting periods were over, HBO officially renewed the series for a seven-episode second season to be written by David E. Kelley and directed by Andrea Arnold. Vallée will remain an executive producer of the series. Meryl Streep will join the cast as the mother of Alexander Skarsgård's character.
The announcement of the second season, and—specifically—its timing, enraged the producers of rival shows that are competing for award nomination in the limited series category. Immediately following HBO's decision to produce a second installment of Big Little Lies, the Producers Guild of America moved to reclassify the original installment of the show from a limited series to a drama series for the upcoming 2018 PGA Awards.
RECEPTION
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Critical response.
Big Little Lies was met with a positive response from critics. On the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the series holds a 93% approval rating with an average rating of 8.04 out of 10 based on 102 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Bitingly funny and highly addictive, Big Little Lies is a twisty, thrilling, enlightening ride led by a first-rate cast." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the series a score of 75 out of 100, based on 42 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Time magazine listed Big Little Lies as one of its top ten television shows of 2017.
RATINGS
ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades.
! scope="col" Year
! scope="col" Award
! scope="col" Category
! scope="col" Nominee(s)
! scope="col" Result
! scope="col" class="unsortable" 
American Film Institute AwardsNicole Kidman
Reese Witherspoon
Best Miniseries or Television Film
Big Little Lies
Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries or Television Film
Alexander Skarsgård
Laura Dern
Shailene Woodley
Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie or Dramatic Special
Jean-Marc Vallée
Nicole Kidman
Reese Witherspoon
Outstanding Limited Series
Big Little Lies
Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Limited Series or Movie
Alexander Skarsgård
Laura Dern
Shailene Woodley
Outstanding Writing for a Limited Series, Movie or Dramatic Special
David E. Kelley
ACE Eddie AwardsCostume Designers Guild Awards
Excellence in Contemporary Television Series
Alix Friedberg
Nicole Kidman
Reese Witherspoon
Best Limited Series
Big Little Lies
Best Supporting Actor in a Movie Made for TV or Limited Series
Alexander Skarsgård
Best Supporting Actress in a Movie Made for TV or Limited Series
Laura Dern
Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Television Movie or Limited Series
Laura Dern
Nicole Kidman
Reese Witherspoon
MEDIA
SOUNDTRACK
Section::::Media.
Section::::Soundtrack.
A soundtrack for the series was released on Google Play and iTunes on March 31, 2017.
BLU-RAY AND DVD
Section::::Blu-ray and DVD.
The first season was released on Blu-ray and DVD on August 1, 2017.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
