
FÉLICETTE
Félicette () was the first cat to have been launched into space. She was launched on 18 October 1963, by France, and is the only cat to have survived spaceflight; a second feline was launched on 24 October, but the mission resulted in a fatality.
Félicette has been commemorated on postage stamps around the world, and in 2017 a funding campaign for a memorial was launched.
PRIOR NON-HUMAN ANIMALS IN SPACE
Section::::Prior non-human animals in space.
On 3 November 1957 the Soviets sent Laika, a dog, into space on Sputnik 2. The dog was a stray found on the streets of Moscow. She died in space, but was the first animal to be launched into space and orbit the Earth. On 31 January 1961, as part of Project Mercury, the chimpanzee Ham became the first hominid launched into space; his mission was a suborbital flight. On 29 November 1961, Enos became the first chimp, and third hominid after cosmonauts Yuri Gagarin and Gherman Titov, to achieve Earth orbit. He orbited the Earth for 1 hour and 28 minutes, surviving the flight and reentry.
MISSION
Section::::Mission.
Félicette was a black-and-white stray cat, found on the streets of Paris by a pet dealer, and later was purchased by the French government. The French had 14 cats in training (in equipment such as high-G centrifuges and compression chambers) in 1963. The animals were trained by the . During testing, all of the cats had permanent electrodes wired into their brain to assess neurological activity.
On 18 October 1963 at 8:09 am, Félicette was launched into space from the Centre interarmées d'essais d'engins spéciaux site in Algeria on a Véronique AGI 47 sounding rocket (made in Vernon, Haute-Normandie). Véronique came from the German World War II Aggregate rocket family and led to the French Diamant satellite launcher. The Veronique AGI was developed for the International Geophysical Year () in 1957 for biological research. Out of the fifteen AGI 47 rockets assembled, 7 would carry live animals.
The mission was a sub-orbital flight, and lasted 13 minutes, reaching a height of 157 kilometers, and included 5 minutes of weightlessness. Félicette was recovered safely after the capsule parachuted to Earth; she was killed three months later so that scientists could examine her brain.
A second, unnamed feline was launched into space on 24 October. Unlike Félicette, that cat died when the carrying rocket exploded on ascent.
LEGACY
Section::::Legacy.
According to an article in Space.com on 8 November 2017, the participation of Félicette in the space race: 
In 1997, postage stamps commemorating Félicette and other animals in space were created in Chad. Félicette's legacy was somewhat obscured as a number of commemorative stamps from different countries mistakenly identified her as a male cat named Félix.
While some non-human animals who traveled in space were celebrated as heroes - the chimpanzee Ham was buried at the International Space Hall of Fame, and the Soviet dog Laika launched in 1957 has a bronze at the Star City cosmonaut training facility - there was no memorial for Félicette. To rectify this oversight, in 2017 a crowdfunding campaign was started by Matthew Serge Guy to erect a bronze statue of Félicette to commemorate her contribution to science. Guy said:
Guy also said that if the crowdfunding is successful, the statue is planned to be designed by sculptor Gill Parker, and installed in Félicette's hometown, Paris. A preliminary sketch of the monument depicts a cat on top of a rocket, and will include a plaque featuring the names of the major donors. As of April 2018, over 1,140 backers had pledged a total of £43,323 to the project, exceeding the £40,000 funding goal.
SEE ALSO
* Laika, first dog in space
* Ham, first hominid in space
* Yuri Gagarin, first human in space
* Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin, first humans on the moon
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Famous Felines
* Space.com article about Félicette memorial
* Kickstarter campaign
