
BUNGO STRAY DOGS
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
The story centers on individuals who are gifted with super natural powers and use them for different purposes including holding a business, solving mysteries, and carrying out missions assigned by the mafia. The story mainly follows the members of the "Armed Detective Agency" and their everyday lives.
Most characters in the series are named after famous literary authors and/or characters in their works, including Ryūnosuke Akutagawa, Atsushi Nakajima, Agatha Christie, Osamu Dazai, Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Rampo Edogawa, Edgar Allan Poe, Mark Twain, Natsuhiko Kyogoku, Kenji Miyazawa, Doppo Kunikida, and Akiko Yosano. Each character's abilities are named after one of their respective namesake's works, such as The Scarlet Letter, No Longer Human, and Light Snow.
CHARACTERS
ARMED DETECTIVE AGENCY
PORT MAFIA
THE GUILD
OTHER CHARACTERS
MEDIA
MANGA
Section::::Media.
Section::::Manga.
Kafka Asagiri and Sango Harukawa began publishing the manga in Kadokawa Shoten's seinen magazine Young Ace in 2012. Kadokawa has compiled the series into twelve tankōbon volumes as of October 2016. The series has been licensed for North America by Yen Press.
VOLUME LIST
LIGHT NOVEL
Section::::Light novel.
Four novels in the series, including a spin-off novel featuring Yukito Ayatsuji and Natsuhiko Kyougoku; written by Asagiri and with illustrations by Harukawa, have been published by Kadokawa. On July 8, 2018, during their panel at Anime Expo, Yen Press announced that they had licensed the light novels.
ANIME
Section::::Anime.
An anime television series adaptation produced by Bones was directed by Takuya Igarashi and written by Yōji Enokido. Nobuhiro Arai and Hiroshi Kanno served as the chief animation directors, while the former also served as character designer along with Ryō Hirata. Taku Iwasaki composed the series' music. Kazuhiro Wakabayashi was the series' sound director at Glovision. Additionally, Yumiko Kondou was the art director, Yukari Goto was the anime's color designer, Tsuyoshi Kanbayashi was the director of photography, and Shigeru Nishiyama was the editor. Granrodeo performed the anime's opening theme, titled "Trash Candy", and Luck Life performed the anime's ending theme, titled .
The series was split into two halves: the first half, containing twelve episodes, premiered on 7 April 2016 and ended on 23 June 2016, being broadcast on Tokyo MX, Teletama, Chiba TV, tvk, GBS (Gifu Broadcasting), Mie TV, Sun TV, TVQ Kyushu, and BS11. The second half, also containing twelve episodes, premiered on 6 October 2016 and ended on 22 December 2016. The series has been licensed for streaming by Crunchyroll. Screen Mode sung the opening theme titled "Reason Living" while Luck Life once again sung the ending theme titled .
An OVA will be bundled with the 13th limited edition manga volume, which is scheduled for release on 31 August 2017.
On July 21, 2018, it has been announced that the series will receive a third season. The staff will reprise their roles from the previous two seasons.
The anime is licensed in North America by Crunchyroll (with home video distribution from Funimation) and in the United Kingdom by Anime Limited.
EPISODE LIST
FILM
Section::::Film.
At the Mayo(w)i Inu-tachi no Utage Sono Ni event on 19 February 2017, a film project based on the manga series was announced. Titled Bungo Stray Dogs: Dead Apple, the film was premiered on 3 March 2018 with the staff and cast from the anime series returning to reprise their roles.
GAME
Section::::Game.
An action role-playing game titled Bungo Stray Dogs Mayoi Inu Kaikitan has been announced and is set to release on iOS and Android. The game will include character side stories that were not found in the anime series as well as new game-exclusive scenarios.
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* at Kadokawa Corporation
