
4TH IMPACT
4th Impact (formerly known as The Cercado Sisters, The Cercados, The Gollayan Sisters, MICA, and 4th Power) is a Filipino girl group composed of sisters Almira, Irene, Mylene and Celina Cercado. The group rose to popularity after competing in the 12th series of X Factor UK, where they finished in fifth place. They are also known for having participated in several Philippine and international talent competitions, including the World Championships of Performing Arts, which they won in 2006 and 2013, and the South Korean talent search Superstar K6 in 2014, where they reached eighth place. The sisters were originally from Santiago City, Isabela, but are now based in Metro Manila, Philippines.
CAREER
2001–14: EARLY YEARS
Section::::Career.
Section::::2001–14: Early years.
Almira, the eldest of the sisters in the group, first began competing at a young age in Filipino talent shows such as Batang Kampeon, which was won by Charice Pempengco, and Star for a Night, which was won by Sarah Geronimo. Early in her career, she received a voice lesson scholarship which paved the way for her to teach her sisters what she learned while also pursuing her own singing career. Solo success for Almira remained elusive, so she continued to compete in singing contests at town fiestas and festivals while her other sisters competed in dance contests.
The sisters formed their singing group in 2001 at the suggestion of an aunt. Initially, they named themselves 'The Cercado Sisters' after their surname and began performing and competing as a girl group at festivals, events and talent shows. In 2006, they were approached by one of the producers of the talent show FamJam, who asked them if they would like to represent the Philippines in the World Championships of Performing Arts. They won 16 gold medals and four outstanding plaques and were proclaimed Junior Vocal Group Grand Champion of the competition. The following year, the group was invited to perform in the 2007 Monaco Charity Film Festival. In 2008, the group released a six-track self-titled EP under Viva Records, which did not reach commercial success. In 2009, they also began using the name 'The Gollayan Sisters', which was derived from their middle name. They continued to compete in various singing contests and in 2012 participated as members of a family troupe that won in the Filipino variety show It's Showtime, singing covers of "I Believe I Can Fly" and "Queen of the Night". Early in 2013, the group landed a regular gig in the musical variety show Sarah G Live as backup singers and dancers. Later that same year, the group competed and won again in the World Championships of Performing Arts, this time as the Grand Winner in the Senior Vocal Group Category, bringing home a haul of 20 gold medals, four silver medals and four over-all champion plaques. In April 2014, the group released their album The Cercados: Unstoppable! under Saturno Music, which also failed to reach commercial success.
! colspan="4" Early appearances
Year
Production
Performed as
Result
2004
FamJam
The Cercado Sisters
3rd place
2006
World Championships of Performing Arts
The Cercado Sisters
Grand Champion - Junior Vocal Group
2007
Monaco Charity Film Festival
The Cercado Sisters
N/A (guest performer)
2008
Pinoy Idol
Cercado Sisters (as individuals)
Eliminated in 1st round
2009
World Championship of Performing Arts
The Cercado Sisters
N/A (guest performer)
2011
Talentadong Pinoy
The Cercado Sisters
Weekly Champions
2011
The Cercado Sisters
Eliminated in knockout rounds
2012
It's Showtime
The Gollayan Sisters (as part of the Gollayan Family)
Champion
2012
KPop Star Hunt (Season 2)
Cercado Sisters (as individuals)
Eliminated in knockout rounds
2013
World Championships of Performing Arts
The Gollayan Sisters
Grand Champion - Senior Vocal Group
2014: SUPERSTAR K
Section::::2014: Superstar K.
In August 2014, the group traveled to South Korea to audition in the talent competition Superstar K6. There they changed their name to 'MICA', an acronym formed from the first letters of their names. In the first stage of the auditions, the group sang "U&I" by Ailee, who, incidentally, was one of the judges on the panel. The judges were particularly impressed with the voices of Almira and Irene, and asked Almira to perform a solo piece to which she sang "Listen" by Beyoncé. Her performance further impressed the judges and the group moved on to the next round, where they performed their rendition of Idina Menzel's song "Let It Go" from the Disney movie Frozen. Their performance went viral on social media and YouTubeLet It Go"
Idina Menzel
! Super Week, Part 1
Solo Performance
"Missing You"
2NE1
! Super Week, Part 2
Group Performance
"I'll Be There" 
The Jackson Five 
! Super Week, Part 3
"Heaven"
Ailee
!Live Show 1
Top 11
"Maria"
Kim Ah Joong
Safe
!Live Show 2
Top 9
"Fate" / "Destiny"
Lee Sun Hee
Safe
!Live Show 3
Top 8
Eliminated
2015: THE X FACTOR
Section::::2015: The X Factor.
After their experience in Superstar K6, the group were about to abandon their singing career until a fan from the United Kingdom suggested that they try auditioning for The X Factor. The group decided to submit an online application for the reality TV competition. After several months, they received an invitation to audition. In July 2015, the sisters traveled to London, and after going through several screening tryouts eventually made it to the arena auditions for the 12th series of The X Factor. Introducing themselves as 4th Power, they performed "Bang Bang" by Jessie J, Ariana Grande and Nicki Minaj as their audition piece. Their performance received a standing ovation from the audience and all four judges, with Simon Cowell saying, "In terms of first auditions, this is probably one of the best I've ever seen." After its airing, the group's audition went viral on YouTube and Facebook; and, as of December 2018, their YouTube audition video had garnered over 127 million views. It is currently the most watched video in the show's history. The group sailed through the "Boot Camp" rounds of the show, where they performed "Proud Mary" by Tina Turner and "Titanium" by David Guetta, and the "Six-Chair Challenge" round where they performed "Show Me How You Burlesque" by Christina Aguilera. There, the mentor for group acts, Cheryl Fernandez-Versini, selected them as one of her final six acts. At this time, copyright issues were raised regarding their use of the name 4th Power, forcing the group to re-brand themselves as 4th Impact. They then progressed to the "Judge's Houses" round, where they sang "Love the Way You Lie (Part II)" by Rihanna ft Eminem and were selected to move on to the live shows.
In the fifth week of the competition, the group found themselves in the bottom two for the first time. Being one of the two acts who received the fewest number of public votes, they had to perform against fellow contestant Lauren Murray for a place in the competition. For the sing-off, the group performed "And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going" by Jennifer Holliday, and later covered by Jennifer HudsonBang Bang"
Jessie J, Ariana Grande and Nicki Minaj
rowspan="5" Advanced
!Bootcamp stage 1
Group performance
"Proud Mary"
Tina Turner
!Bootcamp stage 2
Own choice
"Titanium"
David Guetta featuring Sia
!Six-chair challenge
Own choice
"Show Me How You Burlesque"
Christina Aguilera
!Judges' houses
Own choice
"Love the Way You Lie (Part II)"
Rihanna featuring Eminem
!Live show 1
Safe (2nd)
!Live show 2
Reinvention
"Sound of the Underground" / "The Clapping Song"
Girls Aloud / Lincoln Chase
Safe (5th)
!Live show 3
Movie week
"Work It Out"
Beyoncé
!Live show 4
Love and heartbreak
"Ain't No Other Man"
Christina Aguilera
Safe (4th)
!rowspan=2Live show 5
! Live show 5 results
Eliminated (fifth place)
2016 - PRESENT: THE X FACTOR LIVE TOUR, INVAS10N TOUR, UNLEASH THE DIVA RELEASE AND TONY VALOR COLLABORATION
Section::::2016 - present: The X Factor Live Tour, Invas10n Tour, Unleash the Diva release and Tony Valor collaboration.
After their elimination from the X Factor UK, 4th Impact received numerous offers to perform throughout the United Kingdom and in other countries. They appeared in several shows, venues and events in London and nearby cities. In early 2016, the group traveled on their first official tour, The X Factor Live Tour, co-headlining with Louisa Johnson, Reggie 'n' Bollie, Che Chesterman, Lauren Murray, Anton Stephans, Mason Noise and Seann Miley Moore. Polls conducted by the show's producers prior to the tour showed 4th Impact as the most anticipated act in the tour's lineup. A poll conducted after the tour named 4th Impact as the best act of the show.
After the X Factor Live Tour, 4th Impact continued to perform in the UK and internationally, particularly in Dubai; UAE; Dublin, Ireland; Oslo, Norway; and Gibraltar. In April 2016, 4th Impact returned to the Philippines to perform in the 1st Paradise International Music Festival, alongside Kanye West, Wiz Kalifa and other international and Filipino artists. Later that same year, the group announced their homecoming concert to the Philippines entitled Invas10n, which also commemorated their tenth year as group. In December 2016, 4th Impact launched their Invas10n Tour, with their first major concert held in the Philippines. They also traveled back to Dubai that same month for a repeat performance of their concert held in the city earlier that year.
The group, with Star Music Philippines' backing, released their original debut single entitled "Unleash The Diva" in January 2017. The song peaked at number 3 in iTunes PH and number 1 at Spotify's Viral 50 PH. An official lyric video of the song was released on YouTube on January 31, 2017, followed by a music video on June 2, 2017.
In March 2017, 4th Impact traveled to Doha, Qatar to perform in a one-night-only concert. Shortly after, they announced the first international leg of their Invas10n Tour, to be held in New Zealand and Australia in August 2017.
In June 2017, the group resumed posting cover songs as 4th Impact on their official YouTube channel. In August 2017, 4th Impact officially announced that their first album is in the works and is being recorded under Star Music. Later that same month, the group went on their international Invas10n tour in Auckland, New Zealand and Melbourne and Sydney, Australia.
In November 2017, 4th Impact announced that they signed with US-based Granda Entertainment and We R 1 Music Group and were in the process of recording an EP of original music.
In early January 2018, 4th Impact announced that they had recorded the official theme song for the Star Cinema movie 'Ang Dalawang Mrs. Reyes' entitled "It's Not The Same Anymore".
On March 21, 2018, Tony Valor, a US-based music artist, announced the international release of his single, "D' Nah Nah", recorded in collaboration with 4th Impact.
DISCOGRAPHY
EXTENDED PLAYS
* Released: September 1, 2008
* Format: Compact Disc and Digital Download
* Label: Viva Records
ALBUMS
Section::::Albums.
As The Cercado Sisters
!Title
!Album Details
The Cercado Sisters: Unstoppable!
* Released: April 1, 2014
* Format: Compact Disk and Digital Download
* Label: Saturno Music
FEATURED SINGLES
(명콤비 Twinz ft MICA)
! scope="row" "Unleash The Diva" 
! scope="row" "It's Not The Same Anymore"
! scope="row" "D' Nah Nah (Shaky Bum Bum)" (Tony Valor ft 4th Impact)
CHART PERFORMANCE
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography.
+Television
! Year
! Title
! Role
! class="unsortable"  Notes
2004
FamJam
Contestant
Season 1
2011
Talentadong Pinoy
Contestant
Season 2
2012
KPop Star Hunt
Contestants (as individuals)
Season 2 (Episode 5)
2016
The Xtra Factor Live
Guest Performer
Season 13
2016
ASOP Music Festival Grand Finals Night
Guest Performer
ASOP Music Festival Year 5
2017
The Voice Teens Philippines
Guest Performer
Teen-IG Concert (Season 1)
CONCERT TOURS
HEADLINING
* 4th Impact Live in Dubai (2016)
* 4th Impact Invas10n (Philippines) (2016)
* 4th Impact Live - The Comeback (Dubai) (2016)
* 4th Impact Live in Doha (2017)
* 4th Impact Invas10n World Tour (2017)( Auckland New Zealand, Melbourne & Sydney Australia)
* 4th Impact Rise Up (Philippines) (2018)
CO-HEADLINING
* The X Factor Live Tour (2016)
* 1st Paradise International Music Festival (2016)
* Powerhouse (with Arnel Pineda) (2016)
AWARDS AND RECOGNITION
Section::::Awards and recognition.
!Year
!Awarding Organization
!Nominee/Work
!Award/Recognition
!Result
2016
Jollibee Philippines
Themselves
Jollibee 'Yumbassador' (Ambassador)
Awarded
2016
UK - BAME (Black Asian Minority Ethnic)
Themselves
Beam Award for Music Artist/Band of the Year
Nominated
2016
National Reality TV Awards
Themselves (in The X Factor UK)
Best Performance on a Reality TV Show
Nominated
2016
29th Awit Awards
Themselves
International Achievement Award
Awarded
2017
2nd WISH 107.5 Music Awards
"Love The Way You Lie"
Best WISHCLUSIVE Performance by a Group or a Duo
Won
2017
Aliw Awards 2017
Unleash/Kia Theater
Best Major Concert (Group)
Nominated
2018
Fandom Battles 2018
4th Impact
Fandom Battle (Dreamers)
Nominated
2018
Rawr Awards 2018
Themselves
Favorite Group
Nominated
REFERENCES
