
LIFE IS STRANGE 2
Life Is Strange 2 is an episodic graphic adventure video game developed by Dontnod Entertainment and published by Square Enix. It is the second main entry of the Life Is Strange series. The first of five episodes was released on 27 September 2018 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One, while episode two has been confirmed for release on 24 January 2019 along with a live action trailer. Episodes from the series will be released for macOS and Linux by Feral Interactive in 2019.
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay.
Life Is Strange 2 is a graphic adventure played from a third-person view. The player takes control of Sean Diaz, who is on the run from the police with his younger brother Daniel. Sean can interact with the environment, obtain objects, and talk with non-player characters via dialogue trees. Decisions that were made in the game demo The Awesome Adventures of Captain Spirit will carry over into Life Is Strange 2; choices in Life Is Strange 2 will lead to different branches in the storyline and affect Daniel's behaviour.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
This story follows a teenager boy named Sean Diaz, 16, as the main character, along with his little brother Daniel, 9. In the first episode, the initial focus is on Sean and his girl companion, Lyla Park. They have big plans to attend a party in celebration of Halloween 2016 and this sequence opens with them preparing for this party. During the preparation, however, Sean becomes acutely aware of a scene unfolding in his front yard between his little brother, Daniel, and the neighbor, Brett Foster.
Sean's little brother Daniel made fake blood for Halloween. While playing outside, he sprayed the blood on Brett's shirt. Brett, who has a history of bullying the Diaz family, starts pushing Daniel, in turn causing Sean to jump from his seat at his computer and confront Brett outside in the front yard. Invariably, an altercation between Brett and Sean follows. A police officer happens to turn the corner in his cruiser and arrives at the scene of the altercation. Brett, a caucasian kid, is now seemingly unconscious after getting punched by Sean and is lying on the ground gasping for air. The officer, who appears to take exception to the fact that the Diaz's are Hispanic, draws his weapon and points it in the direction of the Diaz boys. The commotion draws the attention of their father, who impetuously runs to the scene of the uproar. In the ensuing confusion, Sean and Daniel's father is shot by the police officer.
Shortly after, an apparently supernatural event leaves the police officer dead and a wave of destruction on the Diaz's street that bore an apocalyptic resemblance. Attempting to steer clear of additional legal besiegement, the brothers take flight on foot from the scene, making tracks from their hometown of Seattle ineluctably toward Puerto Lobos, Mexico, where their father owns some land. This journey results in a series of "mini-adventures," during which time Sean becomes aware that Daniel was the cause of the supernatural event, as he possesses the power to harness and manipulate the wind. At the end of Episode 1, Sean and Daniel are seen on a bus heading toward, presumably, Mexico.
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Development.
Prior to production, developer Dontnod Entertainment decided that Life Is Strange 2 would feature new characters and a new location to the original. Led by Life Is Strange directors Michel Koch and Raoul Barbet, development on the sequel began in early 2016, while the predecessor shipped its retail edition. Life Is Strange lead writers Christian Divine and Jean-Luc Cano and composer Jonathan Morali also reprised their roles. The concept was influenced by the photography of Mike Brodie, who would freighthop across the United States and take pictures of drifters. The game is structured like a road movie, inspired by the film Into the Wild and novella Of Mice and Men. Dontnod conducted field research on the West Coast of the United States, meeting people and taking pictures there. The two primary themes of the game are education and brotherhood. Using the Unreal Engine 4, they upgraded the animation system, physics, and shaders. According to Dontnod, one of the biggest challenges of development was the artificial intelligence of the character Daniel. The music will contain both original and licensed tracks.
RELEASE
Section::::Release.
The first of five total episodes, Roads (formerly called Seattle), was released on 27 September 2018 for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 4, and Xbox One. Feral Interactive will publish the macOS and Linux versions of that episode in 2019. The second episode will be released on 24 January 2019.
In reference to the long development and release window between episodes, Dontnod issued a statement, saying "The Life is Strange series is a project close to all of our hearts and one for which we do not want to rush development and thereby fail to meet the benchmark of quality and emotional impact that you, our players, deserve. This is why we so far have not announced an official release date [for episode two]".
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
The Verge said in their review that the game "wades into more political, timely topics", with the first episode set in October 2016, right before the election of Donald Trump. The characters yell about "building walls" and worry what will happen if Trump wins the election... and it "feels like a powerful statement about American politics during a very tense time". They also said the "dialogue is awkward and feels like it was run through a teen translator, but there are moments that feel authentic...and it's also filled with lots of beautiful, quiet moments". Overall though, they stated you can still enjoy the game even if you haven't played previous entries in the series.
In their verditct, IGN also opined about the underlying political atmosphere of the game. They saw the first episode of the game as a "bigger, more complex story than told by its predecessor, charting a cross-country road trip across Donald Trump's America, and although its "social criticisms feel broad and rather clumsy...its core story of brotherhood and fraternity between two believable characters is enormously touching...it makes time for small details and quiet moments, and when it does it's capable of a beauty we rarely see in video games".
GamesRadar was disappointed with the game, saying it had a "slow start" to the new season, and while "the story has some incredibly powerful and well-constructed moments, it doesn't hang together particularly well". They were also worried about the "lack of actual gameplay, combined with inconsistent consequences and choices". However, they complimented the settings and the overall mood as being "wonderfully crafted, and the soundtrack is hauntingly beautiful as ever". They ended their review stating that fans of the game "will undoubtedly enjoy what's here, but most will expect much more from forthcoming episodes...this one is very much a work-in-progress.
ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades.
! Year !! Award !! Category !! Result !! Reference
Golden Joystick Awards
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
