
HOW IT ENDS (FILM)
How It Ends is a 2018 American action disaster thriller film directed by David M. Rosenthal and written by Brooks McLaren. The film stars Theo James, Forest Whitaker, Grace Dove, Kat Graham, and Mark O'Brien.
The film was released on July 13, 2018 by Netflix.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
Will and Samantha (Sam) are a young couple who are expecting their first child. Will flies from Seattle to visit Sam's parents in Chicago, intending to ask permission to marry Sam from Tom, her disapproving father. At dinner, Will and Tom get in an argument and Will does not mention the proposal.
The next day, Sam calls Will before his flight back. There is a mysterious sound and Samantha, scared, says, "Something's wrong" before the call disconnects and Will cannot call her back. At the airport, all flights are cancelled. During a TV news report that discusses preliminary reports on a seismic event off the West Coast of the United States that has disrupted electrical power and telecommunication, electricity and phone lines in Chicago are disrupted. Will returns to Sam's parents' house, where Tom and Will agree to travel together to Seattle to find Sam.
Amid heavy traffic, Will and Tom discover that soldiers have closed off the interstate highway for safety reasons. Tom manages to persuade them to let his car through. That night, they are pulled over by what appears to be a police patrol but is in actuality an escaped convict with a shotgun. The ensuing firefight results in an accident that fractures Tom's ribs. Tom knocks out the convict with a blunt object and they use the police cruiser to tow their damaged car to a nearby reservation. 
At the reservation, Tom finds a mechanic, Ricki, who fixes the car and agrees to travel with them in case their car breaks down again. The trio set out, making sure to restock for provisions when they can, first at a small town reluctant to help outsiders and again at an abandoned theme park. At one point, robbers hold the three of them at gunpoint and steal their gasoline reserves. While Will drives after the robbers, Ricki shoots out the tires, causing the robbers' car to flip over. With the flipped car's leaking gas tank and surrounding fire, they barely have enough time to take their gasoline back before the car explodes, resulting in the robbers' deaths. Upset over the consequences of her actions, Ricki leaves Tom and Will.
The next day Tom's lungs collapse. Will performs a needle thoracostomy to help him breathe. Sensing that Tom will die without medical help, the two of them bond and Will finally feels that Tom approves of his relationship with Sam. On a bridge, they encounter a gang of armed men on motorcycles. The two of them work together to evade the gang, but Tom succumbs to his wounds and dies. The car breaks down and Will continues the journey on foot.
A family picks Will up and he leads them to his father's house in Idaho where they all rest. Will strikes a deal with the family to take their four wheel drive in exchange for them staying at his father's well-stocked house until they are ready to go north, where they hear the situation is better. As he gets closer to Seattle, Will sees that the city is almost completely destroyed. He sees a note left by Sam with an address to a cabin. 
At the cabin, Will finds Sam with their neighbour Jeremiah. The next morning, Jeremiah attempts to kill Will, having fallen in love with Sam. Will shoots him as he turns to fire his pistol. Soon after, an earthquake triggers a large eruption, causing a pyroclastic flow. Will and Sam drive away from the all-engulfing cloud.
CAST
* Theo James as Will, an attorney who is based in Seattle and travels to Chicago to ask his girlfriend's parents for their daughter Sam's hand in marriage
* Forest Whitaker as Tom, Paula's husband and Sam's father
* Kat Graham as Sam, Will's girlfriend who is pregnant with his child, and Tom's and Paula's daughter
* Nicole Ari Parker as Paula, Tom's wife and Sam's mother
* Grace Dove as Ricki, an auto mechanic who fixes Tom's car
* Mark O'Brien as Jeremiah, Will and Sam's neighbor in Seattle
* Kerry Bishé as Meg, a friend of Will and Sam's who lives in Ashland Heights
* Eric Keenleyside as Sheriff Reynolds, the sheriff of Ashland Heights
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production.
On March 19, 2011, it was announced that Sierra/Affinity was developing an action thriller film How It Ends based on the 2010 Black List script by Brooks McLaren, and it would be produced by Paul Schiff and Tai Duncan through Paul Schiff Productions. On December 1, 2015, David M. Rosenthal came on board to direct the film, while Sierra Pictures, which developed the project, would also produce the film and fully finance it. On January 4, 2017, Netflix acquired worldwide rights to the film. In June 2017, Theo James, Forest Whitaker, and Kat Graham were cast in the film. In September 2017, Mark O'Brien was cast in the film.
FILMING
Section::::Filming.
Principal photography took place in Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada in August 2017.
RELEASE
Section::::Release.
The first full-length trailer was released by Netflix on June 22, 2018. The film was released on July 13, 2018.
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
Critical consensus is overwhelmingly negative. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 15% based on 13 reviews, with an average rating of 2.9/10. Metacritic gives the film a weighted average score of 36 out of 100, based on 5 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
