
WOMAN WALKS AHEAD
Woman Walks Ahead is a 2017 American biographical drama film directed by Susanna White and written by Steven Knight. The film is the story of Catherine Weldon (Jessica Chastain), a portrait painter who travels from New York to Dakota to paint a portrait of Sitting Bull (Michael Greyeyes) in 1890. Chaske Spencer and Sam Rockwell also star.
The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival September 10, 2017. It was released through DirecTV Cinema on May 31, 2018, before being released in a limited release on June 29, 2018, by A24.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
Catherine Weldon, a portrait painter from 1890s Brooklyn, travels to Dakota to paint a portrait of Sitting Bull and becomes embroiled in the Lakota peoples' struggle over the rights to their land.
CAST
* Jessica Chastain as Catherine Weldon, Sitting Bull's confidante and adviser
* Michael Greyeyes as Sitting Bull
* Sam Rockwell as Colonel Silas Grove
* Ciarán Hinds as James McLaughlin, a commanding officer
* Michael Nouri as Karl Valentine
* Chaske Spencer as Chaska, a local lawman
* Bill Camp as General Cook
* Rulan Tangen as Susan McLaughlin
* Louise Krause as Loretta
* Lyle Sandoval as Tracker
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production.
On February 3, 2016, it was reported that Jessica Chastain was in talks to play Sitting Bull's confidante in Woman Walks Ahead, directed by Susanna White. On September 14, 2016, Michael Greyeyes, Sam Rockwell, Ciarán Hinds, Chaske Spencer, and Bill Camp joined the cast, with principal photography having begun in New Mexico.
RELEASE
Section::::Release.
The film had its world premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 10, 2017. Shortly after, A24 and DirecTV Cinema acquired distribution rights to the film. Its U.S. premiere was at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 25, 2018.
It was released through DirecTV Cinema on May 31, 2018, before being released in a limited release on June 29, 2018.
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 53% based on 36 reviews, and an average rating of 5.9/10. On Metacritic, which assigns a rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100, based on 19 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".
Despite mixed reviews, Michael Greyeyes received critical acclaim for his portrayal of Sitting Bull. The New York Times critic Jeannette Catsoulis called his performance "a miracle of intelligence and dignity". RogerEbert.com contributor Susan Wloszczyna raved about his performance, calling it "the most subtle, soulful, and believable". Los Angeles Times and Village Voice described his presence as captivating as "wry wit and quiet gravity" while the latter described his performance as "stirring".
HISTORICAL INACCURACIES
Section::::Historical inaccuracies.
The plot revolves around a vote in 1890 to "ratify" a "Dawes Act Treaty" whereby the tribal members would decide whether their reservation would be allotted — wrongly implying that tribal members had some say in the allotment process. In fact, the last treaty ratified by the U.S. Senate (tribes did not "ratify" treaties) was the 1868 Treaty of Fort Laramie. After 1868, Congress unilaterally dictated Indian policy to the tribes. One such policy was allotment, authorized by the Dawes Act of 1887 and subsequent statutes. Under the Dawes Act, the president was authorized to survey a reservation, allot 40 to 160 acre tracts to tribal families and individuals, then open the "surplus" lands for sale to non-Indians. Tribal members had no say in the matter, and that's understandable given that destruction of tribalism was one goal of the policy. President Theodore Roosevelt, for instance, thought of allotment as a "mighty pulverizing engine to break up the tribal mass... [acting] directly upon the family and the individual." The allotment policy led to the loss of nearly 90 million acres of tribal lands, and destabilized tribal self-governance until after passage of the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934. More a century later, tribes continue to struggle with the aftermath of allotment as they try to govern reservations with checkerboard land ownership patterns, and where federal Indian law allows tribes little authority over non-Indian landowners on the reservation. 
The film concludes with the assassination of Sitting Bull by a hidden sniper who appears to be of Native American descent — purportedly because of his opposition to the "ratification" of the Dawes Act Treaty. Sitting Bull was opposed to assimilation and allotment, but the main concern of officials was Sitting Bull's support for the Messiah (Ghost Dance) movement. Sitting Bull was killed while being arrested at daybreak on December 16, 1890, but according to Indian Agent James McLaughlin the shooting occurred during a confused scuffle between several dozen Indian police and a group of about 150 "crazed Ghost Dancers." Details vary, but no known alternative view materially disputes McLaughlin's version of the tragic event.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
