
ROBERT LANGDON (FILM SERIES)
The Robert Langdon films are a series of American mystery thriller movies directed by Ron Howard. The films focus on Robert Langdon, a fictional character appearing in the Robert Langdon (book series) by author Dan Brown. The film series has a different chronological order than the novels, and consists of The Da Vinci Code (2006), Angels & Demons (2009) and Inferno (2016). The series has grossed almost $1.5 billion worldwide.
BACKGROUND
Section::::Background.
Dan Brown's novels about Professor Robert Langdon: Angels & Demons (2000), The Da Vinci Code (2003), and Inferno (2013), quickly became international bestsellers, and were soon adapted into films by Columbia Pictures with Ron Howard directing and producing, and Tom Hanks portraying Langdon.
FILMS
THE DA VINCI CODE (2006)
Section::::Films.
Section::::The Da Vinci Code (2006).
A murder inside the Louvre and clues in Da Vinci paintings lead to the discovery of a religious mystery protected by a secret society for two thousand years, which could shake the foundations of Christianity.
ANGELS & DEMONS (2009)
Section::::Angels & Demons (2009).
Harvard symbologist Robert Langdon continues to work to solve a murder and prevent a terrorist act against the Vatican.
INFERNO (2016)
Section::::Inferno (2016).
When Robert Langdon wakes up in an Italian hospital with amnesia, he teams up with Dr. Sienna Brooks, and together they must race across Europe against the clock to foil a deadly global plot.
UNADAPTED FILM
THE LOST SYMBOL
Section::::Unadapted film.
Section::::The Lost Symbol.
Following the worldwide successes of The Da Vinci Code in 2006 and Angels & Demons in 2009, which were both based on Brown's novels, starring Tom Hanks as Robert Langdon and produced and directed by Ron Howard, Columbia Pictures began production on a film adaptation of The Lost Symbol. Hanks and Howard were expected to return for the film adaptation of The Lost Symbol, along with the franchise's producers Brian Grazer and John Calley. Sony Pictures eventually hired three screenwriters for the project, beginning with Steven Knight and then hiring Brown himself. In March 2012, Danny Strong was also hired to collaborate on the adaptation.
According to a January 2013 article in Los Angeles Times, the final draft of the screenplay was due sometime in February, with pre-production expected to start in the mid-2013. In July 2013, Sony Pictures announced they would instead adapt Inferno for an October 14, 2016 release date with Howard as director, David Koepp adapting the screenplay and Hanks reprising his role as Robert Langdon.
CAST AND CHARACTERS
The Da Vinci CodeAngels & DemonsInferno
! Professor Robert Langdon
! Sophie Neveu
! Sir Leigh Teabing
! Bishop Aringarosa
! Captain Bezu Fache
! André Vernet
! Silas
! Father Patrick McKenna
! Dr. Vittoria Vetra
! Commander Maximilian Richter
! Cardinal Strauss
! Lieutenant Chartrand
! Dr. Sienna Brooks
! Christoph Bouchard
! Bertrand Zobrist
! Elizabeth Sinskey
! Harry Sims a.k.a. "The Provost"
PRODUCTION CREW
RECEPTION
BOX OFFICE PERFORMANCE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Box office performance.
! rowspan="2"  Film
! rowspan="2"  Release date
! colspan="4"  Box office gross
! colspan="2"  Box office ranking
! rowspan="2"  Budget
! rowspan="2"  
! Opening weekend(North America)
! North America
! Other territories
! Worldwide
! All timeNorth America
! All timeworldwide
! colspan="3"  Total
! $
! colspan="2" 
! $350 million
CRITICAL AND PUBLIC RESPONSE
Section::::Critical and public response.
! Film
! Rotten Tomatoes
! Metacritic
! CinemaScore
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN NOVELS AND FILMS
THE DA VINCI CODE
ANGELS & DEMONS
Section::::Difference between novels and films.
Section::::Angels & Demons.
There are many differences between the novel and the film.
* In the novel, the papal conclave attracts relatively little public attention. In the wake of the huge international interest in the 2005 election of Pope Benedict XVI, this was judged to be out of date.
* The character of CERN Director Maximillian Kohler does not appear in the film.
* The Italian Camerlengo Carlo Ventresca is changed to the Irish Patrick McKenna, portrayed by Ewan McGregor.
* The Boeing X-33 that takes Langdon from the United States to Geneva and then to Rome is absent in the film.
* In the novel, Commander Olivetti is the commander of Swiss Guard, and his second in command is Captain Rocher, whereas in the film, Richter is the head of the Swiss Guard.
* In the novel, the Assassin contacts members of the BBC in order to influence how they present the story of his activities, but this does not happen in the film.
* The character Leonardo Vetra is named Silvano Bentivoglio in the film, is not related to Vittoria and his death scene is changed.
* Vittoria is a love interest for Langdon in the novel while there is no attraction present in the film.
* In the novel Camerlengo Carlo Ventresca is revealed to be the late pope's biological son, in the film he is his adoptive son.
* In the book, the assassin has Middle Eastern looks whereas in the movie he is portrayed by a Danish actor Nikolaj Lie Kaas . In the film, he is killed by a car bomb, whereas in the book he falls from a balcony at the top of the Castel Sant Angelo and breaks his back on a pile of marble cannonballs which eventually kills him.
* In the novel, Vittoria is kidnapped, whereas in the film, she follows Langdon almost everywhere. In the book, all four preferiti are killed by the assassin and eventually the high elector, Cardinal Saverio Mortati, is elected as the new pope whereas in the film, the fourth preferito, Cardinal Baggia, is saved by Langdon and is elected the new pope. The high elector, renamed Cardinal Strauss, becomes the Camerlengo to the new pope.
* In the end, the new Camerlengo hands over Galileo's book to Langdon instead of a Swiss guard handing the 5th brand, the Illuminati diamond (which is also different in the movie and looks like two crossed keys). In the movie before the explosion Langdon doesn't get on the helicopter unlike in the book where he does and right before the explosion jumps out, barely surviving.
INFERNO
* In the novel, the Inferno Virus causes sterility in one third of the human population. At the end of the novel it is revealed that the virus was released before the events of the book, as the date given in the video was when the virus would be worldwide, thus searching for its whereabouts was futile.
* In the novel, Dr. Sienna Brooks intends to prevent the virus from being released and to destroy it as she believes Governments and other organisations will use it as a weapon and at the end of the novel she is offered a position in the WHO in order to address the crisis.
* In the novel, Dr. Elizabeth Sinskey is not a former romantic interest of Robert Langdon.
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
