
THE WALL (GAME SHOW)
The Wall is an American television game show broadcast by NBC, which premiered on December 19, 2016. The show is hosted by Chris Hardwick, who also serves as executive producer on the show along with LeBron James, Maverick Carter, and Andrew Glassman. On January 18, 2017, NBC ordered 20 additional episodes bringing the episode count to 30. On March 12, 2018, The Wall was renewed for the third season with 20 episodes.
Two special episodes aired on November 22, 2017 and December 27, 2017. A special Christmas themed episode aired on December 4, 2017. The second half of the second season premiered on January 1, 2018.
In 2018, Telemundo announced plans for a Spanish-language version of The Wall to premiere in 2019. The game show will be hosted by Marco Antonio Regil.
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay.
The Wall is a four-story-tall (40 ft) pegboard, similar to a pachinko game or bean machine; it also is similar to the Plinko board used for the pricing game of the same name on The Price Is Right. The bottom of the board is divided into 15 slots marked with various dollar amounts; eight of these range from $1 to $100 and remain constant throughout the game, while the others have higher values and increase from round to round. Seven numbered "drop zones" are centered at the top of the board (above the center seven slots), from which balls can be dropped into play.
A team of two contestants plays each game, with a potential top prize of $12,374,994. Green balls dropped on the board will add to the team's bank, while red balls dropped on the board will subtract from it. Throughout the game, the bank has a floor of $0.
ROUND 1: FREE FALL
Section::::Round 1: Free Fall.
In Free Fall, the team is asked a series of five questions, each with two answer choices. As each question is asked, three balls are simultaneously released from drop zones 1, 4, and 7. The team must select one answer and lock it in before any portion of a ball crosses the threshold of a money slot. If the team's answer is correct, the balls turn green and their values are added to the team's bank. If the team answers incorrectly or fails to lock in an answer, the balls turn red and their values are subtracted from the team's bank.
If the team's bank balance is zero at the end of this round, the game is over and they leave without any winnings. If not, their earnings become part of a guaranteed payout to be offered to them at the end of the game. The highest amount that a team can bank in this round is $375,000.
The values on the board range from $1 to $25,000, and are arranged as follows:
ROUND 2
Section::::Round 2.
At the start of the second round, the contestants are separated from each other for the remainder of the game. One enters an isolation chamber behind The Wall, while the other remains onstage. Two green balls are played simultaneously, dropped from zones chosen by the onstage player. Three multiple-choice questions are then played, each with three answer choices. The onstage player is shown only the answers to each question, and must decide which zone to use, based on how confident he/she is that the isolated player can answer correctly. The question and answers are then presented to the isolated player; after he/she responds, the ball is dropped from the chosen zone. A correct answer turns the ball green and adds the value of the slot it lands in to the team bank, while a miss turns the ball red and deducts the value. The isolated player is not told which of his/her answers are correct or given any information on the team bank.
The onstage player is offered an opportunity to "Double Up" on the second question and "Triple Up" on the third; these options allow him/her to play two or three balls from the selected drop zone instead of one, respectively.
After the third question, if the banked total is at least $3 (as the least that could be lost from two red balls is $2), two red balls are dropped simultaneously from the same zones that were chosen for the initial two green balls. The maximum amount that a team can bank in this round is $1,999,998.
The values on the board range from $1 to $250,000, and are arranged as follows:
ROUND 3
Section::::Round 3.
Gameplay proceeds as in Round 2, but each of the three questions now has four answer choices. In addition, four green and four red balls are played at the start and end of the round respectively, and are dropped one at a time, rather than simultaneously. The "Double Up" and "Triple Up" options are available as before.
The maximum amount that a team can bank in this round is $9,999,996.
The values on the board range from $1 to $1,000,000, and are arranged as follows:
FINAL DECISION
Section::::Final Decision.
After the third question in Round 3, the isolated player is sent a contract by the host, and he/she must sign it or tear it up. Signing the contract gives up the team bank in favor of a guaranteed payout, equal to the Free Fall winnings plus an additional $20,000 for every question answered correctly in Rounds 2 and 3. If the isolated player tears up the contract, the team receives their final bank total instead. After the four red balls have dropped in Round 3 and the final bank is calculated (or after the last question if there is less than $4 banked), the isolated player returns to the stage to reveal his/her decision. Only at this point does he/she learn the number of correct answers given, the payout total, and the team's final bank.
The maximum possible guaranteed payout is $495,000, obtained by scoring $375,000 in Free Fall and answering all questions correctly in Rounds 2 and 3. The maximum possible bank total is $12,374,994, obtained by answering every question correctly, using every Double Up and Triple Up option, having every green ball drop into the highest-valued slot, and having the six mandatory red balls each drop into a $1 slot.
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes.
Color key
SEASON 1
SEASON 2
HOLIDAY SPECIALS
CRITICAL RECEPTION
Section::::Critical reception.
The Wall has received mixed reviews by critics. Jan Chaney of Vulture dubbed The Wall as being "the most stereotypically American game show on television right now" and "absurd yet undeniably diverting." Chaney criticized the show for making "attempts to sell us something new, even though its concept is really based on old ideas [...] mixed up just enough [to] seem fresh".
Bethonie Butler of Chicago Tribune agreed that "The Wall looks a lot like the famed Plinko game from CBS", but qualified that "originality is relative when it comes to game shows", remarking on the similarity between popular trivia game shows such as Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? and Are You Smarter than a 5th Grader?
MERCHANDISE
* The first licensed merchandise for the series will be a video game produced by Unity, which was released on December 17, 2017 of the iOS for the iPhone, iPad, iPod touch & Android.
* The second licensed merchandise for the series will be the game of Ravensburger for Season 3.
INTERNATIONAL VERSIONS
MBC 1
The Wall: Construye tu vida
Telefe
The Wall
Axle Whitehead
Seven Network
The Wall: De muur die geeft en neemt
Niels Destadsbader
VTM
The Wall
Luciano Huck
Rede Globo
Face au Mur
TVA
January 18, 2018 – present
The Wall
Rafael Araneda
Chilevisión
June 20, 2018 – August 29, 2018
The Wall
Andrea Serna
Caracol Televisión
Zeď Česko
Lucie Borhyová
TV Nova
TBD
The Wall
Casper Christensen
Kanal 5
January 27, 2019 - present
The Wall Suomi
Heikki Paasonen
Nelonen
Julien Courbet
C8
RTL
The Wall
Grigoris Arnaoutoglou
ANT1
A Fal
Balázs Sebestyén
RTL Klub
Zvika Hadar
Reshet 13
Gerry Scotti
Canale 5
January 6, 2019 - present
BankGiro Loterij The Wall
SBS 6
The Wall
TBA
TV 2
TBA
TVP 1
The Wall – Marele Zid
Antena 1
Стена
Russia 1
Stena
Dano Heriban
Markíza
March 1, 2019 - present
Carlos Sobera
Telecinco
The Wall Sverige
David Hellenius
TV4
2019
Vuthithorn "Woody" Milintachinda
The Wall UK
TBA
Channel 4
2019
The Wall
Marco Antonio Regil
Telemundo
2019
The Wall: Cumplí tu Sueño
Canal 10
SEE ALSO
* Peggle – a similar game published by PopCap Games
* Tipping Point – a similar game show airing in the United Kingdom, whereby counters worth £50 are dropped into a "win zone" to win money
* The Price Is Right – the Plinko game is similar to this game show
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
