
BLACK LIGHTNING (TV SERIES)
Black Lightning is an American superhero television series developed by Salim Akil, airing on The CW. It is based on the DC Comics character of the same name, created by Tony Isabella and Trevor Von Eeden. It stars Cress Williams as the titular character alongside China Anne McClain, Nafessa Williams, Christine Adams, Marvin Jones III, Damon Gupton, and James Remar. The series sees the retired Black Lightning return to the hero life and its effects on his family life.
Development on the series began in September 2016 when Fox ordered a pilot production commitment for Black Lightning. In February 2017, Fox passed on the series, with it being picked up by The CW with a new script for the pilot. The CW officially ordered the series in May 2017. The first season premiered on January 16, 2018, for a 13-episode run. On April 2, 2018, The CW renewed the show for a second season, which premiered on October 9, 2018.
PREMISE
Section::::Premise.
High school principal Jefferson Pierce, who retired from his superhero persona Black Lightning nine years ago after seeing the effects it had on his family, is forced to become a vigilante again when the rise of the local gang called the 100 led by Tobias Whale leads to increased crime and corruption in his community of Freeland.
In season two, as Black Lightning continues his feud with Tobias Whale, he and his family deal with the arising anti-superhuman bigotry within their community after its metahuman members' existences are exposed.
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Cress Williams as Jefferson Pierce / Black Lightning: A retired superhero with the ability to harness and manipulate electricity who works as a principal at Garfield High School. He returns to fighting crime after his daughters are kidnapped by a local gang. Kaden Washington Lewis portrays teenage Jefferson Pierce.
* China Anne McClain as Jennifer Pierce: Jefferson's younger daughter, who is "an independent, outspoken scholar-athlete with a wild streak of her own", who also possesses powers where her cells start generating energy; her electric power is orange unlike her father's which is blue.
* Nafessa Williams as Anissa Pierce / Thunder: Jefferson's elder daughter who is in medical school and teaches part-time at Jefferson's school. Anissa is a metahuman like her father, having an ability to manipulate her density with her breathing and emotions, endowing herself with superhuman strength and durability. She can also create powerful shockwaves against her opponents with this power during combat. In addition, she has an accelerated healing factor. She eventually fights crime as Thunder, and later becomes her father's protégée and partner. Describing her character as a positive role model, Williams said "I'm just really grateful to tell the story for young lesbians — and black lesbians in particular ... My hope is that when you watch Anissa, a young lesbian is inspired to walk boldly as who she is and to love herself and to love herself exactly how she looks."
* Christine Adams as Lynn Stewart: A neuroscientist at Bowman College and Jefferson's ex-wife.
* Marvin "Krondon" Jones III as Tobias Whale: A former politician who rose through the ranks of local government through corruption but was brought down by Jefferson's father, Alvin. After killing Alvin, Tobias was exiled and became the leader of the 100. Despite being Black Lightning's chief adversary and wanting to kill him, Whale becomes involved with the A.S.A.'s efforts to capture and study him.
* Damon Gupton as Bill Henderson: A veteran detective inspector with the police who becomes an unlikely ally to Jefferson, despite his role in the community. After exposing the dirty Deputy Chief, Cayman, he is appointed to replace him. Henderson eventually learns that Jefferson is Black Lightning, fracturing their relationship.
* James Remar as Peter Gambi: Jefferson's oldest friend who became a father figure and mentor to him and works as his "tailor" while having connections with Lady Eve. His real name is Peter Esposito and was a former member of the A.S.A. until he turned against the organization and gave information to Alvin Pierce, resulting in his murder.
* Jordan Calloway as Khalil Payne / Painkiller (season 2; recurring, season 1): A track star at Garfield High and Jennifer's ex-boyfriend. After a bullet from Syonide's gun paralyzes him from the waist down, he becomes involved with Tobias Whale where he undergoes an experimental treatment done by the A.S.A. involving a spinal implant that gives him enhanced abilities, becomes a cyborg in the process. Tobias Whale is the one who names Khalil's new form of Painkiller.
EPISODES
SEASON 1 (2018)
SEASON 2 (2018)
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production.
Section::::Development.
In September 2016, after being in various stages of development, Warner Bros. Television began pitching Black Lightning to networks. The project was being developed by Mara Brock Akil and her husband, Salim Akil. They were partnered with Greg Berlanti, who was behind several DC Comics properties for the studio, eventually landing at Fox with a pilot production commitment. In February 2017, Fox opted not to go forward with the project, deciding that it was "not a good fit into its already crowded genre drama space". Warner Bros. Television presented the project to other networks, with The CW officially ordering a pilot for Black Lightning. The CW also opted to discard the original pilot script, as it had been written for Fox, and shoot a short presentation instead. The CW officially ordered Black Lightning to series on May 10, 2017.
On April 2, 2018, The CW renewed the show for a second season, which premiered on October 9, 2018.
WRITING
Section::::Writing.
Salim Akil stated that Black Lightning would not follow the villain of the week format or be a procedural, because he wanted to "explore the characters, even the villains".
CASTING
Section::::Casting.
In late February 2017, Cress Williams was cast as Jefferson Pierce / Black Lightning, followed a month later by the casting of China Anne McClain and Nafessa Williams as his daughters, Jennifer Pierce and Anissa Pierce, respectively, and Christine Adams was cast as Lynn Pierce, Jefferson's ex-wife. At the 2017 San Diego Comic-Con International, it was announced that James Remar and Damon Gupton had joined the cast as Pierce's friend Peter Gambi and detective inspector Henderson, respectively. The following month, Marvin "Krondon" Jones III of the hip hop group Strong Arm Steady was cast as Tobias Whale.
At the end of September 2017, Kyanna Simone Simpson was cast as the recurring role Kiesha. The following month, Edwina Findley joined the cast as Tori Whale, while Chantal Thuy was cast as Grace Choi. In January 2018, it was revealed that Skye Marshall had been cast as Mrs. Fowdy.
DESIGN
Section::::Design.
Black Lightning's costume was designed by Laura Jean Shannon.
FILMING
Section::::Filming.
Filming for the series takes place in Atlanta. Filming for the first season began August 14, 2017. Filming for the second season began June 28, 2018
MUSIC
Section::::Music.
Kurt Farquhar composes the soundtrack for the series while Godholly provides original music for the series. These tracks include "Black Lightning", "Power", "Green Light", "Welcome to Freeland", "Can't Go" and "Thunder".
RELEASE
DVD and Blu-rayESTRegion 1Region 2Region 4
BROADCAST
Section::::Broadcast.
Black Lightning began airing on The CW on January 16, 2018, and ran for 13 episodes. Netflix airs new episodes of Black Lightning weekly outside of the United States.
HOME MEDIA
Section::::Home media.
The first season was released on Blu-ray and DVD in Region 1 on June 26, 2018.
RECEPTION
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Critical response.
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the first season has received a 96% approval rating, with an average rating of 8.35/10, based on 48 reviews. The website's critical consensus reads, "Black Lightning doesn't reinvent superhero TV, but it does give the genre a necessary jolt with real-world plots, scary new villains, and a star-making performance from Cress Williams." Metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned a score of 79 out of 100 based on reviews from 25 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Daniel Fienberg, in a review for The Hollywood Reporter, praised the series for being "smart and relevant and full of an attitude that's all its own." Nafessa Williams's portrayal of Thunder has received praise for being the first representation of a black lesbian superhero on television.
ACCOLADES
CONNECTION TO THE ARROWVERSE
Section::::Connection to the Arrowverse.
Despite airing on The CW and being created by Berlanti, Mark Pedowitz, president of The CW said in May 2017 that the series "at this time, is not part of the Arrowverse. It is a separate situation." Berlanti had previously stated when the series was in development at Fox that it would not crossover with his other DC Comics television properties on The CW nor would it exist in the Arrowverse. Akil later stated that they were not ruling out eventual crossovers. In August 2017, Pedowitz added, "If [the showrunners] wish to bring it in, that is their call. We had a long discussion with the studio, Mara, Salim, and myself. We were fine with them making it separate from the Arrowverse, they have a different point of view. If they end up wanting to go that way, that will be their decision." Salim Akil noted references in the first season to the Arrowverse heroes Vixen and Supergirl were a "fun" way "to tease the fans". He also further reiterated that the series existed on a separate Earth from the other Arrowverse series (like Earth-1 from The Flash, Arrow, and Legends of Tomorrow and Earth-38 from Supergirl) and was hopeful that any future crossover would involve the heroes of the other series visiting the Earth that is associated with Black Lightning.
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
