
HOTEL ARTEMIS
Hotel Artemis is a 2018 dystopian thriller film written and directed by Drew Pearce, in his feature film directorial debut. It stars Jodie Foster, Sterling K. Brown, Sofia Boutella, Jeff Goldblum, Charlie Day, Brian Tyree Henry, Jenny Slate, Dave Bautista, and Zachary Quinto. The plot follows Jean Thomas, a nurse who runs a secret hospital for criminals in futuristic Los Angeles. It was released in the United States on June 8, 2018 and grossed $12.6 million. It received mixed reviews from critics, who praised its visual style, intriguing screenplay and acting (particularly Foster's) but found the execution poor.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
On June 21, 2028, a riot breaks out in Los Angeles over the affordability and availability of water after it is privatized. Taking advantage of the distraction, a four-man crew of brothers Sherman and Lev and miscreants Buke and P-22 rob a bank. Unable to break into the vault, they steal from hostages at the bank, realizing that they were mainly staff of the wealthy sent to deposit valuables into the vault. Lev takes a male hostage's fancy pen despite being warned by the man not to. During their escape, an encounter with the police leaves P-22 dead and Buke and Lev critically wounded. They make their way to the nearby Hotel Artemis, a hotel/hospital that only treats criminals, run by Jean "the Nurse" Thomas. The Hotel only treats members who are paid-up in advance, so Sherman and Lev are allowed in while Buke as a non-member is kicked out by Everest, the Nurse's assistant.
At the Hotel are two other guests. Code names for all guests are assigned based on the suite they are occupying. Sherman is code-named Waikiki, and Lev is code-named Honolulu. The other guests are code-named Acapulco, and Nice. The Nurse gets word from criminal Crosby Franklin that his father Orian "The Wolf King" Franklin, is en route and in need of immediate medical attention. Meanwhile, Waikiki catches up with Nice, who has moved on to work internationally while Waikiki has remained Stateside. When he reveals the pen his brother stole during the robbery, Nice explains that the pen is a mobile safe, and unlocks it to show it contains precious diamonds, saying they belong to the Wolf King, and reminding Waikiki that the Wolf King kills anybody who steals from him. To make matters worse, a wounded police officer named Morgan arrives outside begging for medical attention from Thomas. Against Everest's warnings, Thomas ventures outside to bring Morgan in, but before they can get back inside, they are set upon by a group of rioters, and then the police. They are saved by an intervention from Everest. The Artemis does not help police, so Everest asks why Thomas has saved Morgan, and Thomas responds that she knew the officer "from before" which is why she is willing to break her own rules (the Artemis' regular lawbreaking customers will not go to a place where the police are allowed).
Thomas had a son named Beau who was close friends with Morgan when they were younger. Beau ended up dying of an apparent drug overdose, leading to Thomas' alcoholism and losing her license to practice medicine, which in turn forced her to run the Hotel Artemis where, over the last 22 years, she has developed severe agoraphobia. Acapulco calls for a private helicopter to pick him up and, whilst waiting for it to arrive on the roof of the Artemis, he runs into Nice who beats him severely after revealing her target is the Wolf King himself. She then places a bomb on the building's generator. As Wolf King, Franklin, and their men show up, Everest secretly leads Morgan out of the building while Waikiki 3D prints a gun for protection. Due to the hotel's rules, Thomas only takes in Wolf King and leaves Crosby and his men in the lobby, after disarming them. The Wolf King leaves Crosby with a signet ring in case he doesn't survive the medical procedures he is about to go through, and is given the additional code name "Niagara" because he is assigned the Niagara Suite in the hotel.
Whilst under anesthesia, the Wolf King inadvertently mentions the name of Thomas' son, which she had never told him. Suspecting him of being involved in her son's death, she raises the level of drugs in his system, forcing him to reveal that Beau did not die of an overdose, but was killed for stealing his prized Porsche 911. Overcome with rage, Thomas prepares to kill him, but is distracted by the bomb blowing out the generator. This causes Honolulu's life support to turn off and frightens Acapulco's helicopter away. Nice sneaks in and kills Wolf King while Thomas is attempting to save Honolulu. Thomas is unable to save his life. Waikiki confronts Nice over Honolulu's death, saying she must have known that blowing out the generator would have terminated his life support, but before they get into it, they are both attacked by Acapulco. In the ensuing fight, Acapulco is killed by Waikiki, but not before being injured by gunfire. Crosby realises the ring Niagara gave him is able to partially blow the security in the hotel lobby, and he and his men start to break their way into the hotel proper. With no other options, Waikiki and Nice decide to take Thomas and flee the Artemis. They run into Everest who pleads with his boss to leave and let him take care of things. Once at the elevator, Nice sends them down and accepts her lot in life as an assassin, asking Thomas to tell a now unconscious Waikiki why she did it. Nice and Everest take on multiple henchmen of The Wolf King in two separate parts of the hotel.
Thomas tends to Waikiki in the lift on the way down, but they are confronted by Crosby whilst leaving the hotel. Waikiki offers him the pen and the millions of dollars in jewels it contains in exchange for their freedom, and he accepts it as trade for Waikiki's freedom, but refuses to let Thomas go, holding her accountable for the death of Niagara. A weakened Waikiki and Crosby fight briefly before Thomas stabs Crosby with a baby elephant tranquilizer, killing him. Leaving the hotel, Thomas overcomes her agoraphobia, and gets a sense of relief despite the ongoing riot. Once at Waikiki's car he prepares for them both to leave, but Thomas chooses to stay as she still feels a desire to help those who need it, implying that she will perhaps open the Artemis (or some other facility) to others now that Niagara and Crosby are dead. Waikiki thanks Thomas and leaves to get help at another hospital in Las Vegas. Everest, having triumphed in his fight, puts on his nursing badge and turns on the Hotel Artemis' sign as Thomas is seen walking through the city.
In a mid-credits scene, a shadowy figure runs across the screen, suggesting Nice may have survived.
CAST
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production.
Development on the project began in November 2016, when it was announced Jodie Foster would star in the film with a script to be written and directed by Drew Pearce.
Filming started in downtown Los Angeles in May 2017 and lasted 33 days.
RELEASE
Section::::Release.
Before filming began Lionsgate acquired the international distribution rights to at the 2017 Berlin Film Festival, with WME Global dealing with the North American release.
The film was released on June 8, 2018. It had its premiere on May 19, 2018 at the Regency Village Theater in Westwood, California. To promote the film, Global Road Entertainment released a set of character posters, each featuring an homage to a famous literary or film reference from Los Angeles, such as Sterling K. Brown merged into the book cover for Raymond Chandler's novel The Long Goodbye and Charlie Day merged into the film poster for American Gigolo.
RECEPTION
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Box office.
In the United States and Canada, Hotel Artemis was released alongside Ocean's 8 and Hereditary, and was initially projected to gross $5–9 million from 2,340 theaters in its opening weekend. However, after making $1.1 million on Friday (including $271,000 from Thursday night previews), estimates were lowered to $3 million. It went on to debut to $3.2 million, finishing eighth at the box office. The film fell 69% in its second weekend to $1 million, finishing 14th. In its third week of release the film was pulled from 92.8% of theaters (2,299 to 163) and grossed just $72,151, marking the 28th-largest third-week theater drop in history.
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response.
On review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 57% based on 154 reviews, and an average rating of 5.7/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Hotel Artemis has a few flashes of wit and an intriguing cast, but mostly it's just a serviceable chunk of slightly futuristic violence—which might be all its audience is looking for." On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 58 out of 100, based on 36 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a grade of "C−" on an A+ to F scale.
Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle praised the first time director and screenwriter for balancing "absurdity, but also the consequences". LaSalle further praised the film for "its genuine thrills, terrific cast and strong performances."
Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun-Times praises the cast and the filmmakers attempt to do something different but is disappointed that the film is "all too predictable and familiar".
Foster's performance received positive reviews and particular attention from critics. Empire's Jonathan Pile said; "Foster gives a performance to treasure — tough on the surface, but conveying an unshakeable sadness", while Screen Rant 's Sandy Schaefer called her the film's best part and said: she naturally gets the meatiest role here as Nurse - whose dry humor masks her struggles with anxiety and a past she cannot escape. Vulture's Emily Yoshida said; Foster, dowdied up and forever shuffling around from room to room, toting a portable record player and headphones, is a massive pleasing anchor amid all the more flashy bullet exchanges and flying kicks that inevitably break out. San Francisco Chronicle's Mick LaSalle said; Not enough can be said about the performance of Foster in this film. She brings to the role a quality of having seen the absolute worst in people, but also the suggestion that, as a result, she accepts them on their own terms and knows how to handle any situation. So she starts the film radiating confidence and sadness, and then, as the story wears on, a creeping sense of panic. Rick Bentley from Tampa Bay Times declared Foster's performance as Oscar-worthy and said; she transforms herself from her world-weary face to a way of shuffling when she walks that suggests a life of pain and suffering ignored to spend more time helping others. This is one of the Oscar-winner's best and most memorable performances.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hotel Artemis on Box Office Mojo
* Hotel Artemis on Fandango
