
LIST OF MY HERO ACADEMIA EPISODES
My Hero Academia is a Japanese superhero manga series written and illustrated by Kōhei Horikoshi. It has been serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump since July 2014, and 21 volumes have been collected in tankōbon format. The series has been licensed for English-language release by Viz Media, and began serialization in their weekly digital manga anthology Weekly Shonen Jump on February 9, 2015. The story follows Izuku Midoriya, a boy born without superpowers in a world where they are the norm, but who still dreams of becoming a superhero himself, and is scouted by the world's greatest hero who shares his powers with Izuku after recognizing his value and enrolls him in a high school for heroes in training.
The manga was adapted into an anime television series produced by Bones. The first season aired from April 3 to June 26, 2016, on TBS, MBS and other JNN stations in 'Nichigo' timeslot at 5pm on Sundays in Japan. The opening theme is "The Day", performed by Porno Graffitti and the ending theme is "Heroes", performed by Brian the Sun.
The second season aired from April 1 to September 30, 2017 on NTV and YTV, with the staff and cast from the first season returning to reprise their roles. The second season's first opening theme is performed by Kenshi Yonezu and the first ending theme is , performed by Little Glee Monster. The second opening theme is performed by amazarashi and the ending theme is by LiSA.
The third season aired from April 7 to September 29, 2018. The third season's first opening theme is "Odd Future" by Uverworld and the first ending theme is by miwa. The third season's second opening theme is "Make my Story" by Lenny Code Fiction and the second ending theme is by Masaki Suda.
The fourth season is currently in production, it will premiere in October 2019.
In the United States, Adult Swim's Toonami block premiered the series' English dub on May 5, 2018.
SERIES OVERVIEW
Section::::Series overview.
! rowspan="2" colspan="2"  Season
! rowspan="2" Episodes
! scope=col colspan="2" Airdates (Japanese)
! scope=col colspan="2" Airdates (English)
! Season premiere
! Season finale
! Season premiere
! Season finale
EPISODE LIST
SEASON 1 (2016)
SEASON 2 (2017)
SEASON 3 (2018)
OVA
NOTES
REFERENCES
SEE ALSO
* List of My Hero Academia chapters
* List of My Hero Academia characters
