
GENERAL HUX
General Armitage Hux is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise. First introduced in the 2015 film , he is portrayed by Irish actor Domhnall Gleeson. He is a ruthless commander in a power struggle with Kylo Ren for the First Order leadership, and being exceeded only by Supreme Leader Snoke. The character first featured in The Force Awakens media and merchandising, and returned in the film's sequel, .
CHARACTER
Section::::Character.
Hux was born on Arkanis and was rumored to have been sired from an affair between his father, Commandant Brendol Hux of the Arkanis Academy, and a kitchen worker. Hux and his father are rescued from the Academy when it is about to fall to the New Republic near the end of the Galactic Civil War. When the war ends with the Battle of Jakku and the signing of the Galactic Concordance, the young Hux and his father are part of the Imperial Navy forces who retreat into the Unknown Regions. These forces later emerge as the First Order. The Republic believes that the First Order is just an unimportant band of Imperial holdouts, but Hux's training methods forge a formidable military. He also longs to use the Starkiller Base weapon against the Republic; Hux believes that the Republic is a threat to galactic stability, and that it is his destiny to rule the galaxy.
APPEARANCES
THE FORCE AWAKENS (2015)
Section::::Appearances.
Section::::The Force Awakens (2015).
Hux first appears in The Force Awakens as the general of the First Order. Hux is part of a mission to Jakku to recover a map to Luke Skywalker, the last Jedi. Kylo Ren leads the search for the map, which they are unable to locate. To prevent the return of the Jedi and to eliminate the Resistance, which, under the command of General Leia Organa, emerged to combat the First Order, Snoke allows Hux to use the Starkiller weapon against the Republic's capital world of Hosnian Prime. The Resistance is left without military support from the Republic, so Hux soon turns the Starkiller weapon towards the Resistance base on D'Qar. Before he could destroy them, however, an attack squadron led by Commander Poe Dameron, with ground support from Han Solo, former stormtrooper Finn, and the Jakku scavenger Rey, destroys Starkiller Base, forcing Hux, his troops, and a defeated Ren to flee the planet.
THE LAST JEDI (2017)
Section::::The Last Jedi (2017).
Hux appears in as the primary general reporting directly to Supreme Leader Snoke. He attempts to respond to a transmission from Dameron, who pretends not to hear him and describes him as "pasty". Hux then leads the subsequent battle, during which both sides sustain heavy losses. He also oversees the bombardment of the remaining three ships of the Resistance. When he discovers that Snoke is dead, he initially protests Ren's claim to be the new Supreme Leader, but is swiftly persuaded otherwise when Ren uses the Force to choke him, proclaiming "The Supreme Leader is dead, long live the Supreme Leader." At the end of the film, he accompanies Ren to the planet Crait in their attempt to finish off the Resistance. When Ren orders his men to fire on Luke Skywalker, Hux admonishes him to focus on the escaping Resistance members; Ren silences him by using the Force to slam him into a wall, knocking him out.
EPISODE IX (2019)
Section::::Episode IX (2019).
Hux will return in , with Gleeson reprising the role.
OTHER MEDIA
Section::::Other media.
Some details about the backstory of Hux and his father Brendol appear in the 2016 novel by Chuck Wendig. Hux and Brendol are also characters in the 2017 novel by Delilah S. Dawson.
Hux also is a playable Dark Side squad leader in a sequel-era update to the mobile MOBA , released in late 2017.
RECEPTION
Section::::Reception.
In his review of The Force Awakens, Henry Barnes of The Guardian wrote that Gleeson's "screechy pseudo-Nazi role" as General Hux is "not as colourful or as nuanced" as Adam Driver's part as Kylo Ren, "but – given he's a functionary – Gleeson certainly makes an impression." Reviewing Hux and his role in the film, David Rutz of The Washington Free Beacon wrote that while Hux is portrayed as a villain, he is shown to be a capable general and "a committed soldier to his cause with laser-like focus on achieving the First Order's ends."
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* General Hux on IMDb
