
RIVIERA (TV SERIES)
Riviera is a British television drama created by Neil Jordan and co-written by Jordan and John Banville. It premiered on Sky Atlantic on 15 June 2017. The series stars Julia Stiles, Lena Olin, Adrian Lester, Iwan Rheon, Dimitri Leonidas and Roxane Duran.
The first season of Riviera was released on 15 June 2017 on Sky Box Sets and NOW TV, and was Sky's most successful original series, with an audience of 2.3 million an episode, and more than 20 million downloads and views total. The series was renewed for a second season on 21 November 2017. 
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis.
Set in the French Riviera, the series follows Georgina Clios, a midwestern art curator whose life is turned upside down after the death of her billionaire husband Constantine Clios in a yacht accident. Georgina becomes immersed in a world of lies, double-dealing and crime, as she seeks to uncover the truth about her husband's death.
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Anthony LaPaglia as Constantine Clios, Georgina's billionaire philanthropist husband who dies in a yacht accident.
* Julia Stiles as Georgina Marjorie Clios, an American art curator who seeks to uncover the truth about her husband's death.
* Adrian Lester as Robert Carver, Georgina's old friend and an art dealer who sells forgeries and stolen artwork.
* Lena Olin as Irina Atman, Constantine's ex-wife.
* Iwan Rheon as Adam Clios, Constantine and Irina's eldest son who rejects his family's extravagant lifestyle and wants to be a writer instead.
* Dimitri Leonidas as Christos Clios, Constantine and Irina's second son who becomes the head of the Clios business empire after his father's death.
* Roxane Duran as Adriana Clios, Constantine and Irina's troubled youngest child.
* Igal Naor as Jakob Negrescu, Constantine's former head of security who has links with drugs, prostitution and gambling.
* Phil Davis as Jukes, a British art fraud investigator who works in the Serious Financial Crime Agency of Interpol.
* Amr Waked as Karim Delormes, an inspector in the Nice police force.
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes.
Note: Every episode was available in the United Kingdom by download from Sky "catch up" following the first episode satellite broadcast.
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production.
Neil Jordan has disowned Riviera.
Filming for season 1 began in August 2016 in the South of France until February 2017. The Clios' lavish "Villa Carmella" estate was filmed at the Chateau Diter in the Cote d'Azur. The first episode of the series debuted at the MIPTV Media Market event in Cannes on 3 April 2017.
Filming for season 2 started on 21 May 2018 to September 2018 in the Cote d'Azur, Monza, Nice, and Monaco for a 2019 release. Joining the show are Will Arnett, Juliet Stevenson, Poppy Delevingne, Jack Fox and Grégory Fitoussi, returning cast include Julia Stiles, Lena Olin, Roxane Duran and Dimitri Leonidas.
RECEPTION
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Critical response.
The series has received mixed reviews.
The Irish Independents Darragh McManus described the series as an "exceedingly well-crafted soap" that is "beautifully filmed...with a stately pace, top-of-the-range acting talent and some interesting little philosophical musings on the nature of money." Writing for The Guardian, Euan Ferguson commended "the presences and talents of Julia Stiles, Adrian Lester, Phil Davis and Lena Olin," and called the series "borderline unmissable".
On the other hand, The Telegraphs Michael Hogan gave the first episode three stars out of five, noting that with Academy Award-winner Neil Jordan as the series' creator and Booker Prize-winner John Banville as co-writer, "the script should have soared but was disappointingly pedestrian." The Guardians Sam Wollaston called the series "awful", concluding that "Riviera might be flashy and moneyed but it lacks personality, charm, humour, soul. It is shallow, vulgar and boring."
RATINGS
Section::::Ratings.
Sky stated that first episode of Riviera drew 1.2 million viewers live and on-demand, the largest audience for a Sky original series premiere since Fortitude in 2015. BARB announced official consolidated ratings for the episode as 709,000. Variety reported an audience of 2.3 million an episode, and more than 20 million downloads and views total.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
