
SIREN (TV SERIES)
Siren (formerly known as The Deep) is an American television drama series that premiered on Freeform on March 29, 2018. The first season included 10 episodes. In May 2018, the series was renewed for a 16-episode second season and set to premiere on January 24, 2019.
PLOT
SEASON ONE
Section::::Plot.
Section::::Season One.
The coastal town of Bristol Cove, known for its legend of once being home to mermaids, is turned upside down when a mysterious young woman (Eline Powell) appears and begins wreaking havoc upon the small fishing town to look for her captured sister (Sibongile Mlambo) who was abducted at the hands of the local military. Marine biologists Ben (Alex Roe) and Maddie (Fola Evans-Akingbola) work together to find out who and what drove this primal hunter of the deep sea to land.
SEASON TWO
Section::::Season Two.
Focusing more on the magical and irresistible siren song and how it affects male humans differently, this season introduces many more merfolk - mermaids and mermen alike - of which the people of Bristol Cove discover that such creatures have existed all along. The season will also be displaying the arrival of Susan Bishop, as she tries to make amends with her estranged family.
CAST AND CHARACTERS
MAIN
* Alex Roe as Ben Pownall, a marine biologist who helps Ryn and is entranced by her melodiously irresistibly hypnotic siren song.
* Eline Powell as Ryn, a strange young mermaid with a dark secret. She comes ashore in search of her sister who had been accidentally captured by fishermen of the North Star motorboat.
* Ian Verdun as Xander McClure, a deep-sea fisherman who seeks to discover the truth about the existence of mermaids.
* Rena Owen as Helen Hawkins, an eccentric woman who seems to know much more about the merfolk than she claims.
* Fola Evans-Akingbola as Maddie Bishop, a marine biologist who is also Ben's girlfriend. She is descended from the ancient Haida people. Her step-father is the sheriff of Bristol Cove, her estranged mother is Susan.
* Sibongile Mlambo as Donna (Season 1), a mystical and deceptively powerful mermaid who is Ryn's older sister. She is highly distrustful towards humans.
RECURRING
* Chad Rook as Chris Mueller, a fisherman who was taken to the military base after getting injured by Donna.
* Curtis Lum as Calvin, a fisherman who is also a friend and roommate of Xander.
* Ron Yuan as Aldon Decker, an expert on mermaids that works for the military.
* Gil Birmingham as Dale Bishop, the sheriff of the Bristol Cove Sheriff Department and Maddie's stepfather.
* Garcelle Beauvais as Susan Bishop (voiced Season 1, Season 2), Maddie's estranged mother and Dale's wife.
* David Cubitt as Ted Pownall, Ben's father, head of the town's fishery industry.
* Sarah-Jane Redmond as Elaine Pownall, Ben's mother, who became paralyzed after an accident.
* Tammy Giles as Marissa Staub, the deputy of the Bristol Cove Sheriff Department.
* Hannah Levien as Janine, Calvin's girlfriend who is also a bartender at the Siren's Song.
* Andrew Jenkins as Doug Pownall, Ben's brother.
* Anthony Harrison as Admiral Harrison, the head of the military base.
* Aylya Marzolf as Katrina, a mermaid alpha leader.
* Sedale Threatt Jr. as Levi, a Merman warrior.
GUEST
* Brian Anthony Wilson as Sean McClure, Xander's father and captain of the fishing boat The North Star, who debuted in the show's premiere, "Pilot", "The Lure", and "Dead in the Water".
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Production.
Section::::Development.
On July 25, 2016, Freeform orders a pilot titled The Deep, based on a story by Eric Wald and Dean White, who will serve as executive producers on the pilot, Wald wrote the script. Scott Stewart will direct the pilot, and Emily Whitesell will serve as the showrunner. On April 19, 2017, the series was officially picked up with the current title for broadcast in the summer of 2018. On October 7, 2017, it was announced that the series would be released on March 29, 2018 in a two-hour event. On May 15, 2018, the series was renewed for a 16-episode second season and set to premiere on January 24, 2019.
CASTING
Section::::Casting.
On August 24, 2016, Eline Powell joined the cast in the role of Po (rennamed Ryn) and Rena Owen as Helen. On September 26, 2016, Ian Verdun joined the cast in the role of Xander, followed by a few days of Alex Roe and Fola Evans-Akingbola in the roles of Ben and Maddie, respectively. Chad Rook announced on May 16, 2017 via twitter that he will be in the series playing Chris Mueller. On July 26, 2017, it was announced that Sibongile Mlambo joined the cast as regular as Donna.
MUSIC
Section::::Music.
Michael A. Levine is the composer of Siren's score. The haunting and seductive Siren Call was written and composed by Levine and performed by singer/songwriter Mariana Barreto. Throughout the composition cycle, Levine incorporated the sounds of the tenor violin, octave viola (ciola), and the gusli. A soundtrack release date has yet to be announced by Freeform.
FILMING
Section::::Filming.
The pilot was filmed in October 2016, in British Columbia, Canada. Pre-production started on July 26, 2017. The official shooting of the remaining episodes began on August 4, 2017, and continued until November 22, 2017.
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing.
The trailer was released on April 19, 2017, the same day it was picked up. The first episode was shown at the New York Comic Con in October 2017.
RECEPTION
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Reception.
Section::::Critical response.
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, the series has an approval rating of 94% based on 16 reviews, with an average rating of 7.75/10. The website's critical consensus reads, "Siren turns traditional lore on its tail with a unique, well-paced show that presents dangerous, violent mythical creatures in a surprisingly empathetic and exciting light."
RATINGS
ACCOLADES
Section::::Accolades.
! Year
! Award
! Category
! Nominee
! Result
! Ref.
BROADCAST
Section::::Broadcast.
In the United Kingdom, the series premiered on SyFy on May 3, 2018.
In Australia, the series premiered on Fox8 HD, on July 30, 2018.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
