
GUNDAM BUILD DIVERS
A prologue original net animation was aired by Sunrise in February 2, 2018, while two sidestories began serialization in June 2018 on both Gundam Ace and Dengeki Hobby Magazine respectively.
PLOT
Section::::Plot.
In the near future, where the Gundam franchise is at its peak and the popularity of Gunpla is soaring to new heights, a new Virtual Reality Massive Multiplayer Online (VRMMO) Game called "Gunpla Battle Nexus Online" (GBN) is made. In Gunpla Battle Nexus Online, players can upload themselves and their Gunpla online through the virtual space and battle with players from across the world. In the game itself, the player assumes the role of a Gunpla Diver, and each year a special tournament called "Gunpla Force Battle Tournament" is held to prove who is the best Gunpla Diver. The story revolves around Riku Mikami, a 14-year old junior high school student and an admirer of famous Gunpla Diver Kyoya Kujo. He and his friends Yukio and Momoka love Gunpla and play GBN together. However, his own life changes as he meets a mysterious Gunpla Diver named Sara as strange events take place in the GBN with the appearance of Mass-Divers. Now guided by his new allies, he forms their first Gunpla Diver group, embarking on epic adventures with his friends and to see who is the best fighter in the GBN world.
CHARACTERS
BUILD DIVERS
GBN USERS
OTHER CHARACTERS
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production.
The series was first teased after the airing of the 5th episode of Gundam Build Fighters: Battlogue in December 2017, with the working title "Gundam Build Next Battle Project" On the official press conference held in The Gundam Base Tokyo in Japan reveals the series after the prologue ONA is streamed. Though Gunpla battles is the main aspect of the series, Virtual Reality and Massive Multiplayer Online games with will be part of series's theme in terms of the series's storyline and also the theme surrounding Gunpla Battle Nexus Online. Alongside the reveal, several character designs were revealed for both the prologue ONA and the anime as well as the main mechas of the series. Staff members from Gundam Build Fighters also returned to produce the anime, with some of the mecha are designed by Kunio Okawara, Kanetake Ebikawa, Junya Ishigaki, Ippei Gyobu, Kenji Teraoka, Shinya Terashima, Takayuki Yanase, Naohiro Washio. Mecha battles in the series are directed by Masami Obari alongside animators Shinya Kusumegi and Sakiko Uda.
MEDIA
ANIME
Section::::Media.
Section::::Anime.
The anime premiered on all TXN network stations in Japan on April 3, 2018, replacing Idol Time PriPara on its initial timeslot. The opening and ending themes from Episodes 1-13 are "Diver's High" is by Sky-Hi and is by Iris while the opening and ending themes from Episodes 14-25 are "Infinity" by SWANKY DANK and "Start Dash" by Spira・Spica. The series' music is composed by Hideakira Kimura. A prologue ONA titled Gundam Build Divers Prologue was first streamed at The Gundam Base Tokyo on February 2, 2018, and later released on YouTube on the same date. The series is also streamed at Sunrise's "GundamInfo" channel on YouTube with subtitles in English, among other languages. Sunrise announced that an English dub is currently being produced by Bang Zoom Entertainment
MANGA
Section::::Manga.
A sidestory Manga titled will begin serialization in Kadokawa Shoten's montly Gundam Ace Magazine in June 2018. The Manga was illustrated by Shiitake Gensui (Go to Helln) and written by Ryōji Sekinishi with mecha designs from Takayuki Yanase.
VIDEO GAMES
Section::::Video games.
One of the series's Mobile Suits, Gundam AGE II Magnum appeared in the 2018 PlayStation 4 game New Gundam Breaker.
MERCHANDISE
Section::::Merchandise.
Part of the series's merchandise will be released under Bandai's long running Gunpla line of scale models and sub-collectible line such as Robot Spirits figures.
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* (TV Tokyo)
